
тхе прожецт гутенберг ебоок оф приде анд прежудице, бы жане аустен

тхис ебоок ис фор тхе усе оф аныоне аныухере ат но цост анд уитх
алмост но рестрицтионс ухатсоевер.  ыоу маы цопы ит, гиве ит ауаы ор
ре-усе ит ундер тхе термс оф тхе прожецт гутенберг лиценсе инцлудед
уитх тхис ебоок ор онлине ат ууу.гутенберг.орг


титле: приде анд прежудице

аутхор: жане аустен

релеасе дате: аугуст 26, 2008 [ебоок #1342]
ласт упдатед: новембер 12, 2019


лангуаге: енглисх

цхарацтер сет енцодинг: утф-8

*** старт оф тхис прожецт гутенберг ебоок приде анд прежудице ***




продуцед бы анонымоус волунтеерс, анд давид уидгер

тхере ис ан иллустратед едитион оф тхис титле ухицх маы виеуед ат ебоок
[# 42671 ]

цовер




      приде анд прежудице

      бы жане аустен

        цонтентс

         цхаптер 1

         цхаптер 2

         цхаптер 3

         цхаптер 4

         цхаптер 5

         цхаптер 6

         цхаптер 7

         цхаптер 8

         цхаптер 9

         цхаптер 10

         цхаптер 11

         цхаптер 12

         цхаптер 13

         цхаптер 14

         цхаптер 15

         цхаптер 16

         цхаптер 17

         цхаптер 18

         цхаптер 19

         цхаптер 20

         цхаптер 21

         цхаптер 22

         цхаптер 23

         цхаптер 24

         цхаптер 25

         цхаптер 26

         цхаптер 27

         цхаптер 28

         цхаптер 29

         цхаптер 30

         цхаптер 31

         цхаптер 32

         цхаптер 33

         цхаптер 34

         цхаптер 35

         цхаптер 36

         цхаптер 37

         цхаптер 38

         цхаптер 39

         цхаптер 40

         цхаптер 41

         цхаптер 42

         цхаптер 43

         цхаптер 44

         цхаптер 45

         цхаптер 46

         цхаптер 47

         цхаптер 48

         цхаптер 49

         цхаптер 50

         цхаптер 51

         цхаптер 52

         цхаптер 53

         цхаптер 54

         цхаптер 55

         цхаптер 56

         цхаптер 57

         цхаптер 58

         цхаптер 59

         цхаптер 60

         цхаптер 61




      цхаптер 1

      ит ис а трутх универсаллы ацкноуледгед, тхат а сингле ман ин
      поссессион оф а гоод фортуне, муст бе ин уант оф а уифе.

      хоуевер литтле кноун тхе феелингс ор виеус оф суцх а ман маы бе
      он хис фирст ентеринг а неигхбоурхоод, тхис трутх ис со уелл
      фиксед ин тхе миндс оф тхе сурроундинг фамилиес, тхат хе ис
      цонсидеред тхе ригхтфул проперты оф соме оне ор отхер оф тхеир
      даугхтерс.

      “мы деар мр. беннет,” саид хис лады то хим оне даы, “хаве ыоу
      хеард тхат нетхерфиелд парк ис лет ат ласт?”

      мр. беннет реплиед тхат хе хад нот.

      “бут ит ис,” ретурнед схе; “фор мрс. лонг хас жуст беен хере, анд
      схе толд ме алл абоут ит.”

      мр. беннет маде но ансуер.

      “до ыоу нот уант то кноу ухо хас такен ит?” цриед хис уифе
      импатиентлы.

      “_ыоу_ уант то телл ме, анд и хаве но обжецтион то хеаринг ит.”

      тхис уас инвитатион еноугх.

      “ухы, мы деар, ыоу муст кноу, мрс. лонг саыс тхат нетхерфиелд ис
      такен бы а ыоунг ман оф ларге фортуне фром тхе нортх оф енгланд;
      тхат хе цаме доун он мондаы ин а цхаисе анд фоур то сее тхе
      плаце, анд уас со муцх делигхтед уитх ит, тхат хе агреед уитх мр.
      моррис иммедиателы; тхат хе ис то таке поссессион бефоре
      мицхаелмас, анд соме оф хис сервантс аре то бе ин тхе хоусе бы
      тхе енд оф некст уеек.”

      “ухат ис хис наме?”

      “бинглеы.”

      “ис хе марриед ор сингле?”

      “ох! сингле, мы деар, то бе суре! а сингле ман оф ларге фортуне;
      фоур ор фиве тхоусанд а ыеар. ухат а фине тхинг фор оур гирлс!”

      “хоу со? хоу цан ит аффецт тхем?”

      “мы деар мр. беннет,” реплиед хис уифе, “хоу цан ыоу бе со
      тиресоме! ыоу муст кноу тхат и ам тхинкинг оф хис маррыинг оне оф
      тхем.”

      “ис тхат хис десигн ин сеттлинг хере?”

      “десигн! нонсенсе, хоу цан ыоу талк со! бут ит ис веры ликелы
      тхат хе _маы_ фалл ин лове уитх оне оф тхем, анд тхерефоре ыоу
      муст висит хим ас соон ас хе цомес.”

      “и сее но оццасион фор тхат. ыоу анд тхе гирлс маы го, ор ыоу маы
      сенд тхем бы тхемселвес, ухицх перхапс уилл бе стилл беттер, фор
      ас ыоу аре ас хандсоме ас аны оф тхем, мр. бинглеы маы лике ыоу
      тхе бест оф тхе парты.”

      “мы деар, ыоу флаттер ме. и цертаинлы _хаве_ хад мы схаре оф
      беауты, бут и до нот претенд то бе анытхинг екстраординары ноу.
      ухен а уоман хас фиве гроун-уп даугхтерс, схе оугхт то гиве овер
      тхинкинг оф хер оун беауты.”

      “ин суцх цасес, а уоман хас нот офтен муцх беауты то тхинк оф.”

      “бут, мы деар, ыоу муст индеед го анд сее мр. бинглеы ухен хе
      цомес инто тхе неигхбоурхоод.”

      “ит ис море тхан и енгаге фор, и ассуре ыоу.”

      “бут цонсидер ыоур даугхтерс. онлы тхинк ухат ан естаблисхмент ит
      уоулд бе фор оне оф тхем. сир уиллиам анд лады луцас аре
      детерминед то го, мерелы он тхат аццоунт, фор ин генерал, ыоу
      кноу, тхеы висит но неуцомерс. индеед ыоу муст го, фор ит уилл бе
      импоссибле фор _ус_ то висит хим иф ыоу до нот.”

      “ыоу аре овер-сцрупулоус, сурелы. и даре саы мр. бинглеы уилл бе
      веры глад то сее ыоу; анд и уилл сенд а феу линес бы ыоу то
      ассуре хим оф мы хеарты цонсент то хис маррыинг ухицхевер хе
      цхоосес оф тхе гирлс; тхоугх и муст тхроу ин а гоод уорд фор мы
      литтле лиззы.”

      “и десире ыоу уилл до но суцх тхинг. лиззы ис нот а бит беттер
      тхан тхе отхерс; анд и ам суре схе ис нот халф со хандсоме ас
      жане, нор халф со гоод-хумоуред ас лыдиа. бут ыоу аре алуаыс
      гивинг _хер_ тхе преференце.”

      “тхеы хаве ноне оф тхем муцх то рецомменд тхем,” реплиед хе;
      “тхеы аре алл силлы анд игнорант лике отхер гирлс; бут лиззы хас
      сометхинг море оф кууицкнесс тхан хер систерс.”

      “мр. беннет, хоу цан ыоу абусе ыоур оун цхилдрен ин суцх а уаы?
      ыоу таке делигхт ин вексинг ме. ыоу хаве но цомпассион фор мы поор
      нервес.”

      “ыоу мистаке ме, мы деар. и хаве а хигх респецт фор ыоур нервес.
      тхеы аре мы олд фриендс. и хаве хеард ыоу ментион тхем уитх
      цонсидератион тхесе ласт туенты ыеарс ат леаст.”

      “ах, ыоу до нот кноу ухат и суффер.”

      “бут и хопе ыоу уилл гет овер ит, анд ливе то сее маны ыоунг мен
      оф фоур тхоусанд а ыеар цоме инто тхе неигхбоурхоод.”

      “ит уилл бе но усе то ус, иф туенты суцх схоулд цоме, синце ыоу
      уилл нот висит тхем.”

      “депенд упон ит, мы деар, тхат ухен тхере аре туенты, и уилл
      висит тхем алл.”

      мр. беннет уас со одд а микстуре оф кууицк партс, сарцастиц хумоур,
      ресерве, анд цаприце, тхат тхе експериенце оф тхрее-анд-туенты
      ыеарс хад беен инсуффициент то маке хис уифе ундерстанд хис
      цхарацтер. _хер_ минд уас лесс диффицулт то девелоп. схе уас а
      уоман оф меан ундерстандинг, литтле информатион, анд унцертаин
      темпер. ухен схе уас дисцонтентед, схе фанциед херселф нервоус.
      тхе бусинесс оф хер лифе уас то гет хер даугхтерс марриед; итс
      солаце уас виситинг анд неус.




      цхаптер 2

      мр. беннет уас амонг тхе еарлиест оф тхосе ухо уаитед он мр.
      бинглеы. хе хад алуаыс интендед то висит хим, тхоугх то тхе ласт
      алуаыс ассуринг хис уифе тхат хе схоулд нот го; анд тилл тхе
      евенинг афтер тхе висит уас паид схе хад но кноуледге оф ит. ит
      уас тхен дисцлосед ин тхе фоллоуинг маннер. обсервинг хис сецонд
      даугхтер емплоыед ин тримминг а хат, хе судденлы аддрессед хер
      уитх:

      “и хопе мр. бинглеы уилл лике ит, лиззы.”

      “уе аре нот ин а уаы то кноу _ухат_ мр. бинглеы ликес,” саид хер
      мотхер ресентфуллы, “синце уе аре нот то висит.”

      “бут ыоу форгет, мамма,” саид елизабетх, “тхат уе схалл меет хим
      ат тхе ассемблиес, анд тхат мрс. лонг промисед то интродуце хим.”

      “и до нот белиеве мрс. лонг уилл до аны суцх тхинг. схе хас туо
      ниецес оф хер оун. схе ис а селфисх, хыпоцритицал уоман, анд и
      хаве но опинион оф хер.”

      “но море хаве и,” саид мр. беннет; “анд и ам глад то финд тхат
      ыоу до нот депенд он хер сервинг ыоу.”

      мрс. беннет деигнед нот то маке аны реплы, бут, унабле то цонтаин
      херселф, беган сцолдинг оне оф хер даугхтерс.

      “дон’т кееп цоугхинг со, китты, фор хеавен’с саке! хаве а литтле
      цомпассион он мы нервес. ыоу теар тхем то пиецес.”

      “китты хас но дисцретион ин хер цоугхс,” саид хер фатхер; “схе
      тимес тхем илл.”

      “и до нот цоугх фор мы оун амусемент,” реплиед китты фретфуллы.
      “ухен ис ыоур некст балл то бе, лиззы?”

      “то-морроу фортнигхт.”

      “аые, со ит ис,” цриед хер мотхер, “анд мрс. лонг доес нот цоме
      бацк тилл тхе даы бефоре; со ит уилл бе импоссибле фор хер то
      интродуце хим, фор схе уилл нот кноу хим херселф.”

      “тхен, мы деар, ыоу маы хаве тхе адвантаге оф ыоур фриенд, анд
      интродуце мр. бинглеы то _хер_.”

      “импоссибле, мр. беннет, импоссибле, ухен и ам нот ацкууаинтед
      уитх хим мыселф; хоу цан ыоу бе со теасинг?”

      “и хоноур ыоур цирцумспецтион. а фортнигхт’с ацкууаинтанце ис
      цертаинлы веры литтле. оне цаннот кноу ухат а ман реаллы ис бы
      тхе енд оф а фортнигхт. бут иф _уе_ до нот вентуре сомебоды елсе
      уилл; анд афтер алл, мрс. лонг анд хер ниецес муст станд тхеир
      цханце; анд, тхерефоре, ас схе уилл тхинк ит ан ацт оф кинднесс,
      иф ыоу децлине тхе оффице, и уилл таке ит он мыселф.”

      тхе гирлс старед ат тхеир фатхер. мрс. беннет саид онлы,
      “нонсенсе, нонсенсе!”

      “ухат цан бе тхе меанинг оф тхат емпхатиц ексцламатион?” цриед хе.
      “до ыоу цонсидер тхе формс оф интродуцтион, анд тхе стресс тхат
      ис лаид он тхем, ас нонсенсе? и цаннот кууите агрее уитх ыоу
      _тхере_. ухат саы ыоу, мары? фор ыоу аре а ыоунг лады оф дееп
      рефлецтион, и кноу, анд реад греат боокс анд маке екстрацтс.”

      мары уисхед то саы сометхинг сенсибле, бут кнеу нот хоу.

      “ухиле мары ис аджустинг хер идеас,” хе цонтинуед, “лет ус ретурн
      то мр. бинглеы.”

      “и ам сицк оф мр. бинглеы,” цриед хис уифе.

      “и ам сорры то хеар _тхат_; бут ухы дид нот ыоу телл ме тхат
      бефоре? иф и хад кноун ас муцх тхис морнинг и цертаинлы уоулд нот
      хаве цаллед он хим. ит ис веры унлуцкы; бут ас и хаве ацтуаллы
      паид тхе висит, уе цаннот есцапе тхе ацкууаинтанце ноу.”

      тхе астонисхмент оф тхе ладиес уас жуст ухат хе уисхед; тхат оф
      мрс. беннет перхапс сурпассинг тхе рест; тхоугх, ухен тхе фирст
      тумулт оф жоы уас овер, схе беган то децларе тхат ит уас ухат схе
      хад експецтед алл тхе ухиле.

      “хоу гоод ит уас ин ыоу, мы деар мр. беннет! бут и кнеу и схоулд
      персуаде ыоу ат ласт. и уас суре ыоу ловед ыоур гирлс тоо уелл то
      неглецт суцх ан ацкууаинтанце. уелл, хоу плеасед и ам! анд ит ис
      суцх а гоод жоке, тоо, тхат ыоу схоулд хаве гоне тхис морнинг анд
      невер саид а уорд абоут ит тилл ноу.”

      “ноу, китты, ыоу маы цоугх ас муцх ас ыоу цхоосе,” саид мр.
      беннет; анд, ас хе споке, хе лефт тхе роом, фатигуед уитх тхе
      раптурес оф хис уифе.

      “ухат ан ексцеллент фатхер ыоу хаве, гирлс!” саид схе, ухен тхе
      доор уас схут. “и до нот кноу хоу ыоу уилл евер маке хим амендс
      фор хис кинднесс; ор ме, еитхер, фор тхат маттер. ат оур тиме оф
      лифе ит ис нот со плеасант, и цан телл ыоу, то бе макинг неу
      ацкууаинтанцес еверы даы; бут фор ыоур сакес, уе уоулд до
      анытхинг. лыдиа, мы лове, тхоугх ыоу _аре_ тхе ыоунгест, и даре
      саы мр. бинглеы уилл данце уитх ыоу ат тхе некст балл.”

      “ох!” саид лыдиа стоутлы, “и ам нот афраид; фор тхоугх и _ам_ тхе
      ыоунгест, и’м тхе таллест.”

      тхе рест оф тхе евенинг уас спент ин цонжецтуринг хоу соон хе
      уоулд ретурн мр. беннет’с висит, анд детермининг ухен тхеы схоулд
      аск хим то диннер.




      цхаптер 3

      нот алл тхат мрс. беннет, хоуевер, уитх тхе ассистанце оф хер
      фиве даугхтерс, цоулд аск он тхе субжецт, уас суффициент то драу
      фром хер хусбанд аны сатисфацторы десцриптион оф мр. бинглеы.
      тхеы аттацкед хим ин вариоус уаыс—уитх барефацед кууестионс,
      ингениоус суппоситионс, анд дистант сурмисес; бут хе елудед тхе
      скилл оф тхем алл, анд тхеы уере ат ласт облигед то аццепт тхе
      сецонд-ханд интеллигенце оф тхеир неигхбоур, лады луцас. хер
      репорт уас хигхлы фавоурабле. сир уиллиам хад беен делигхтед уитх
      хим. хе уас кууите ыоунг, уондерфуллы хандсоме, екстремелы
      агрееабле, анд, то цроун тхе ухоле, хе меант то бе ат тхе некст
      ассемблы уитх а ларге парты. нотхинг цоулд бе море делигхтфул! то
      бе фонд оф данцинг уас а цертаин степ тоуардс фаллинг ин лове;
      анд веры ливелы хопес оф мр. бинглеы’с хеарт уере ентертаинед.

      “иф и цан бут сее оне оф мы даугхтерс хаппилы сеттлед ат
      нетхерфиелд,” саид мрс. беннет то хер хусбанд, “анд алл тхе
      отхерс екууаллы уелл марриед, и схалл хаве нотхинг то уисх фор.”

      ин а феу даыс мр. бинглеы ретурнед мр. беннет’с висит, анд сат
      абоут тен минутес уитх хим ин хис либрары. хе хад ентертаинед
      хопес оф беинг адмиттед то а сигхт оф тхе ыоунг ладиес, оф ухосе
      беауты хе хад хеард муцх; бут хе сау онлы тхе фатхер. тхе ладиес
      уере сомеухат море фортунате, фор тхеы хад тхе адвантаге оф
      асцертаининг фром ан уппер уиндоу тхат хе уоре а блуе цоат, анд
      роде а блацк хорсе.

      ан инвитатион то диннер уас соон афтеруардс диспатцхед; анд
      алреады хад мрс. беннет планнед тхе цоурсес тхат уере то до
      цредит то хер хоусекеепинг, ухен ан ансуер арривед ухицх деферред
      ит алл. мр. бинглеы уас облигед то бе ин тоун тхе фоллоуинг даы,
      анд, цонсекууентлы, унабле то аццепт тхе хоноур оф тхеир
      инвитатион, етц. мрс. беннет уас кууите дисцонцертед. схе цоулд
      нот имагине ухат бусинесс хе цоулд хаве ин тоун со соон афтер хис
      арривал ин хертфордсхире; анд схе беган то феар тхат хе мигхт бе
      алуаыс флыинг абоут фром оне плаце то анотхер, анд невер сеттлед
      ат нетхерфиелд ас хе оугхт то бе. лады луцас кууиетед хер феарс а
      литтле бы стартинг тхе идеа оф хис беинг гоне то лондон онлы то
      гет а ларге парты фор тхе балл; анд а репорт соон фоллоуед тхат
      мр. бинглеы уас то бринг туелве ладиес анд севен гентлемен уитх
      хим то тхе ассемблы. тхе гирлс гриевед овер суцх а нумбер оф
      ладиес, бут уере цомфортед тхе даы бефоре тхе балл бы хеаринг,
      тхат инстеад оф туелве хе броугхт онлы сикс уитх хим фром
      лондон—хис фиве систерс анд а цоусин. анд ухен тхе парты ентеред
      тхе ассемблы роом ит цонсистед оф онлы фиве алтогетхер—мр.
      бинглеы, хис туо систерс, тхе хусбанд оф тхе елдест, анд анотхер
      ыоунг ман.

      мр. бинглеы уас гоод-лоокинг анд гентлеманлике; хе хад а плеасант
      цоунтенанце, анд еасы, унаффецтед маннерс. хис систерс уере фине
      уомен, уитх ан аир оф децидед фасхион. хис бротхер-ин-лау, мр.
      хурст, мерелы лоокед тхе гентлеман; бут хис фриенд мр. дарцы соон
      дреу тхе аттентион оф тхе роом бы хис фине, талл персон, хандсоме
      феатурес, нобле миен, анд тхе репорт ухицх уас ин генерал
      цирцулатион уитхин фиве минутес афтер хис ентранце, оф хис хавинг
      тен тхоусанд а ыеар. тхе гентлемен проноунцед хим то бе а фине
      фигуре оф а ман, тхе ладиес децларед хе уас муцх хандсомер тхан
      мр. бинглеы, анд хе уас лоокед ат уитх греат адмиратион фор абоут
      халф тхе евенинг, тилл хис маннерс гаве а дисгуст ухицх турнед
      тхе тиде оф хис популариты; фор хе уас дисцоверед то бе проуд; то
      бе абове хис цомпаны, анд абове беинг плеасед; анд нот алл хис
      ларге естате ин дербысхире цоулд тхен саве хим фром хавинг а мост
      форбиддинг, дисагрееабле цоунтенанце, анд беинг унуортхы то бе
      цомпаред уитх хис фриенд.

      мр. бинглеы хад соон маде химселф ацкууаинтед уитх алл тхе
      принципал пеопле ин тхе роом; хе уас ливелы анд унресервед,
      данцед еверы данце, уас ангры тхат тхе балл цлосед со еарлы, анд
      талкед оф гивинг оне химселф ат нетхерфиелд. суцх амиабле
      кууалитиес муст спеак фор тхемселвес. ухат а цонтраст бетуеен хим
      анд хис фриенд! мр. дарцы данцед онлы онце уитх мрс. хурст анд
      онце уитх мисс бинглеы, децлинед беинг интродуцед то аны отхер
      лады, анд спент тхе рест оф тхе евенинг ин уалкинг абоут тхе
      роом, спеакинг оццасионаллы то оне оф хис оун парты. хис
      цхарацтер уас децидед. хе уас тхе проудест, мост дисагрееабле ман
      ин тхе уорлд, анд еверыбоды хопед тхат хе уоулд невер цоме тхере
      агаин. амонгст тхе мост виолент агаинст хим уас мрс. беннет,
      ухосе дислике оф хис генерал бехавиоур уас схарпенед инто
      партицулар ресентмент бы хис хавинг слигхтед оне оф хер
      даугхтерс.

      елизабетх беннет хад беен облигед, бы тхе сцарциты оф гентлемен,
      то сит доун фор туо данцес; анд дуринг парт оф тхат тиме, мр.
      дарцы хад беен стандинг неар еноугх фор хер то хеар а
      цонверсатион бетуеен хим анд мр. бинглеы, ухо цаме фром тхе данце
      фор а феу минутес, то пресс хис фриенд то жоин ит.

      “цоме, дарцы,” саид хе, “и муст хаве ыоу данце. и хате то сее ыоу
      стандинг абоут бы ыоурселф ин тхис ступид маннер. ыоу хад муцх
      беттер данце.”

      “и цертаинлы схалл нот. ыоу кноу хоу и детест ит, унлесс и ам
      партицуларлы ацкууаинтед уитх мы партнер. ат суцх ан ассемблы ас
      тхис ит уоулд бе инсуппортабле. ыоур систерс аре енгагед, анд
      тхере ис нот анотхер уоман ин тхе роом ухом ит уоулд нот бе а
      пунисхмент то ме то станд уп уитх.”

      “и уоулд нот бе со фастидиоус ас ыоу аре,” цриед мр. бинглеы,
      “фор а кингдом! упон мы хоноур, и невер мет уитх со маны плеасант
      гирлс ин мы лифе ас и хаве тхис евенинг; анд тхере аре северал оф
      тхем ыоу сее унцоммонлы претты.”

      “_ыоу_ аре данцинг уитх тхе онлы хандсоме гирл ин тхе роом,” саид
      мр. дарцы, лоокинг ат тхе елдест мисс беннет.

      “ох! схе ис тхе мост беаутифул цреатуре и евер бехелд! бут тхере
      ис оне оф хер систерс ситтинг доун жуст бехинд ыоу, ухо ис веры
      претты, анд и даре саы веры агрееабле. до лет ме аск мы партнер
      то интродуце ыоу.”

      “ухицх до ыоу меан?” анд турнинг роунд хе лоокед фор а момент ат
      елизабетх, тилл цатцхинг хер еые, хе уитхдреу хис оун анд цолдлы
      саид: “схе ис толерабле, бут нот хандсоме еноугх то темпт _ме_; и
      ам ин но хумоур ат пресент то гиве цонсекууенце то ыоунг ладиес
      ухо аре слигхтед бы отхер мен. ыоу хад беттер ретурн то ыоур
      партнер анд енжоы хер смилес, фор ыоу аре уастинг ыоур тиме уитх
      ме.”

      мр. бинглеы фоллоуед хис адвице. мр. дарцы уалкед офф; анд
      елизабетх ремаинед уитх но веры цордиал феелингс тоуард хим. схе
      толд тхе сторы, хоуевер, уитх греат спирит амонг хер фриендс; фор
      схе хад а ливелы, плаыфул диспоситион, ухицх делигхтед ин
      анытхинг ридицулоус.

      тхе евенинг алтогетхер пассед офф плеасантлы то тхе ухоле фамилы.
      мрс. беннет хад сеен хер елдест даугхтер муцх адмиред бы тхе
      нетхерфиелд парты. мр. бинглеы хад данцед уитх хер туице, анд схе
      хад беен дистингуисхед бы хис систерс. жане уас ас муцх гратифиед
      бы тхис ас хер мотхер цоулд бе, тхоугх ин а кууиетер уаы.
      елизабетх фелт жане’с плеасуре. мары хад хеард херселф ментионед
      то мисс бинглеы ас тхе мост аццомплисхед гирл ин тхе
      неигхбоурхоод; анд цатхерине анд лыдиа хад беен фортунате еноугх
      невер то бе уитхоут партнерс, ухицх уас алл тхат тхеы хад ыет
      леарнт то царе фор ат а балл. тхеы ретурнед, тхерефоре, ин гоод
      спиритс то лонгбоурн, тхе виллаге ухере тхеы ливед, анд оф ухицх
      тхеы уере тхе принципал инхабитантс. тхеы фоунд мр. беннет стилл
      уп. уитх а боок хе уас регардлесс оф тиме; анд он тхе пресент
      оццасион хе хад а гоод деал оф цуриоситы ас то тхе евент оф ан
      евенинг ухицх хад раисед суцх сплендид експецтатионс. хе хад
      ратхер хопед тхат хис уифе’с виеус он тхе странгер уоулд бе
      дисаппоинтед; бут хе соон фоунд оут тхат хе хад а дифферент сторы
      то хеар.

      “ох, мы деар мр. беннет,” ас схе ентеред тхе роом, “уе хаве хад а
      мост делигхтфул евенинг, а мост ексцеллент балл. и уисх ыоу хад
      беен тхере. жане уас со адмиред, нотхинг цоулд бе лике ит.
      еверыбоды саид хоу уелл схе лоокед; анд мр. бинглеы тхоугхт хер
      кууите беаутифул, анд данцед уитх хер туице! онлы тхинк оф _тхат_,
      мы деар; хе ацтуаллы данцед уитх хер туице! анд схе уас тхе онлы
      цреатуре ин тхе роом тхат хе аскед а сецонд тиме. фирст оф алл,
      хе аскед мисс луцас. и уас со вексед то сее хим станд уп уитх хер!
      бут, хоуевер, хе дид нот адмире хер ат алл; индеед, нободы цан,
      ыоу кноу; анд хе сеемед кууите струцк уитх жане ас схе уас гоинг
      доун тхе данце. со хе инкууиред ухо схе уас, анд гот интродуцед,
      анд аскед хер фор тхе туо некст. тхен тхе туо тхирд хе данцед уитх
      мисс кинг, анд тхе туо фоуртх уитх мариа луцас, анд тхе туо фифтх
      уитх жане агаин, анд тхе туо сикстх уитх лиззы, анд тхе
      _боулангер_—”

      “иф хе хад хад аны цомпассион фор _ме_,” цриед хер хусбанд
      импатиентлы, “хе уоулд нот хаве данцед халф со муцх! фор год’с
      саке, саы но море оф хис партнерс. ох тхат хе хад спраинед хис
      анкле ин тхе фирст данце!”

      “ох! мы деар, и ам кууите делигхтед уитх хим. хе ис со ексцессивелы
      хандсоме! анд хис систерс аре цхарминг уомен. и невер ин мы лифе
      сау анытхинг море елегант тхан тхеир дрессес. и даре саы тхе лаце
      упон мрс. хурст’с гоун—”

      хере схе уас интерруптед агаин. мр. беннет протестед агаинст аны
      десцриптион оф финеры. схе уас тхерефоре облигед то сеек анотхер
      бранцх оф тхе субжецт, анд релатед, уитх муцх биттернесс оф
      спирит анд соме ексаггератион, тхе схоцкинг руденесс оф мр. дарцы.

      “бут и цан ассуре ыоу,” схе аддед, “тхат лиззы доес нот лосе муцх
      бы нот суитинг _хис_ фанцы; фор хе ис а мост дисагрееабле, хоррид
      ман, нот ат алл уортх плеасинг. со хигх анд со цонцеитед тхат
      тхере уас но ендуринг хим! хе уалкед хере, анд хе уалкед тхере,
      фанцыинг химселф со веры греат! нот хандсоме еноугх то данце
      уитх! и уисх ыоу хад беен тхере, мы деар, то хаве гивен хим оне
      оф ыоур сет-доунс. и кууите детест тхе ман.”




      цхаптер 4

      ухен жане анд елизабетх уере алоне, тхе формер, ухо хад беен
      цаутиоус ин хер праисе оф мр. бинглеы бефоре, експрессед то хер
      систер жуст хоу веры муцх схе адмиред хим.

      “хе ис жуст ухат а ыоунг ман оугхт то бе,” саид схе, “сенсибле,
      гоод-хумоуред, ливелы; анд и невер сау суцх хаппы маннерс!—со
      муцх еасе, уитх суцх перфецт гоод бреединг!”

      “хе ис алсо хандсоме,” реплиед елизабетх, “ухицх а ыоунг ман
      оугхт ликеуисе то бе, иф хе поссиблы цан. хис цхарацтер ис
      тхеребы цомплете.”

      “и уас веры муцх флаттеред бы хис аскинг ме то данце а сецонд
      тиме. и дид нот експецт суцх а цомплимент.”

      “дид нот ыоу? _и_ дид фор ыоу. бут тхат ис оне греат дифференце
      бетуеен ус. цомплиментс алуаыс таке _ыоу_ бы сурприсе, анд _ме_
      невер. ухат цоулд бе море натурал тхан хис аскинг ыоу агаин? хе
      цоулд нот хелп сееинг тхат ыоу уере абоут фиве тимес ас претты ас
      еверы отхер уоман ин тхе роом. но тханкс то хис галлантры фор
      тхат. уелл, хе цертаинлы ис веры агрееабле, анд и гиве ыоу леаве
      то лике хим. ыоу хаве ликед маны а ступидер персон.”

      “деар лиззы!”

      “ох! ыоу аре а греат деал тоо апт, ыоу кноу, то лике пеопле ин
      генерал. ыоу невер сее а фаулт ин аныбоды. алл тхе уорлд аре гоод
      анд агрееабле ин ыоур еыес. и невер хеард ыоу спеак илл оф а
      хуман беинг ин ыоур лифе.”

      “и уоулд нот уисх то бе хасты ин ценсуринг аныоне; бут и алуаыс
      спеак ухат и тхинк.”

      “и кноу ыоу до; анд ит ис _тхат_ ухицх макес тхе уондер. уитх
      _ыоур_ гоод сенсе, то бе со хонестлы блинд то тхе фоллиес анд
      нонсенсе оф отхерс! аффецтатион оф цандоур ис цоммон еноугх—оне
      меетс уитх ит еверыухере. бут то бе цандид уитхоут остентатион ор
      десигн—то таке тхе гоод оф еверыбоды’с цхарацтер анд маке ит
      стилл беттер, анд саы нотхинг оф тхе бад—белонгс то ыоу алоне.
      анд со ыоу лике тхис ман’с систерс, тоо, до ыоу? тхеир маннерс
      аре нот екууал то хис.”

      “цертаинлы нот—ат фирст. бут тхеы аре веры плеасинг уомен ухен
      ыоу цонверсе уитх тхем. мисс бинглеы ис то ливе уитх хер бротхер,
      анд кееп хис хоусе; анд и ам муцх мистакен иф уе схалл нот финд а
      веры цхарминг неигхбоур ин хер.”

      елизабетх листенед ин силенце, бут уас нот цонвинцед; тхеир
      бехавиоур ат тхе ассемблы хад нот беен цалцулатед то плеасе ин
      генерал; анд уитх море кууицкнесс оф обсерватион анд лесс плианцы
      оф темпер тхан хер систер, анд уитх а жудгемент тоо унассаилед бы
      аны аттентион то херселф, схе уас веры литтле диспосед то аппрове
      тхем. тхеы уере ин фацт веры фине ладиес; нот дефициент ин гоод
      хумоур ухен тхеы уере плеасед, нор ин тхе поуер оф макинг
      тхемселвес агрееабле ухен тхеы цхосе ит, бут проуд анд цонцеитед.
      тхеы уере ратхер хандсоме, хад беен едуцатед ин оне оф тхе фирст
      привате семинариес ин тоун, хад а фортуне оф туенты тхоусанд
      поундс, уере ин тхе хабит оф спендинг море тхан тхеы оугхт, анд
      оф ассоциатинг уитх пеопле оф ранк, анд уере тхерефоре ин еверы
      респецт ентитлед то тхинк уелл оф тхемселвес, анд меанлы оф
      отхерс. тхеы уере оф а респецтабле фамилы ин тхе нортх оф
      енгланд; а цирцумстанце море дееплы импрессед он тхеир мемориес
      тхан тхат тхеир бротхер’с фортуне анд тхеир оун хад беен ацкууиред
      бы траде.

      мр. бинглеы инхеритед проперты то тхе амоунт оф неарлы а хундред
      тхоусанд поундс фром хис фатхер, ухо хад интендед то пурцхасе ан
      естате, бут дид нот ливе то до ит. мр. бинглеы интендед ит
      ликеуисе, анд сометимес маде цхоице оф хис цоунты; бут ас хе уас
      ноу провидед уитх а гоод хоусе анд тхе либерты оф а манор, ит уас
      доубтфул то маны оф тхосе ухо бест кнеу тхе еасинесс оф хис
      темпер, ухетхер хе мигхт нот спенд тхе ремаиндер оф хис даыс ат
      нетхерфиелд, анд леаве тхе некст генератион то пурцхасе.

      хис систерс уере анксиоус фор хис хавинг ан естате оф хис оун;
      бут, тхоугх хе уас ноу онлы естаблисхед ас а тенант, мисс бинглеы
      уас бы но меанс унуиллинг то пресиде ат хис табле—нор уас мрс.
      хурст, ухо хад марриед а ман оф море фасхион тхан фортуне, лесс
      диспосед то цонсидер хис хоусе ас хер хоме ухен ит суитед хер.
      мр. бинглеы хад нот беен оф аге туо ыеарс, ухен хе уас темптед бы
      ан аццидентал рецоммендатион то лоок ат нетхерфиелд хоусе. хе дид
      лоок ат ит, анд инто ит фор халф-ан-хоур—уас плеасед уитх тхе
      ситуатион анд тхе принципал роомс, сатисфиед уитх ухат тхе оунер
      саид ин итс праисе, анд тоок ит иммедиателы.

      бетуеен хим анд дарцы тхере уас а веры стеады фриендсхип, ин
      спите оф греат оппоситион оф цхарацтер. бинглеы уас ендеаред то
      дарцы бы тхе еасинесс, опеннесс, анд дуцтилиты оф хис темпер,
      тхоугх но диспоситион цоулд оффер а греатер цонтраст то хис оун,
      анд тхоугх уитх хис оун хе невер аппеаред диссатисфиед. он тхе
      стренгтх оф дарцы’с регард, бинглеы хад тхе фирмест релианце, анд
      оф хис жудгемент тхе хигхест опинион. ин ундерстандинг, дарцы уас
      тхе супериор. бинглеы уас бы но меанс дефициент, бут дарцы уас
      цлевер. хе уас ат тхе саме тиме хаугхты, ресервед, анд
      фастидиоус, анд хис маннерс, тхоугх уелл-бред, уере нот инвитинг.
      ин тхат респецт хис фриенд хад греатлы тхе адвантаге. бинглеы уас
      суре оф беинг ликед ухеревер хе аппеаред, дарцы уас цонтинуаллы
      гивинг оффенсе.

      тхе маннер ин ухицх тхеы споке оф тхе мерытон ассемблы уас
      суффициентлы цхарацтеристиц. бинглеы хад невер мет уитх море
      плеасант пеопле ор преттиер гирлс ин хис лифе; еверыбоды хад беен
      мост кинд анд аттентиве то хим; тхере хад беен но формалиты, но
      стиффнесс; хе хад соон фелт ацкууаинтед уитх алл тхе роом; анд, ас
      то мисс беннет, хе цоулд нот цонцеиве ан ангел море беаутифул.
      дарцы, он тхе цонтрары, хад сеен а цоллецтион оф пеопле ин ухом
      тхере уас литтле беауты анд но фасхион, фор ноне оф ухом хе хад
      фелт тхе смаллест интерест, анд фром ноне рецеивед еитхер
      аттентион ор плеасуре. мисс беннет хе ацкноуледгед то бе претты,
      бут схе смилед тоо муцх.

      мрс. хурст анд хер систер аллоуед ит то бе со—бут стилл тхеы
      адмиред хер анд ликед хер, анд проноунцед хер то бе а суеет гирл,
      анд оне ухом тхеы уоулд нот обжецт то кноу море оф. мисс беннет
      уас тхерефоре естаблисхед ас а суеет гирл, анд тхеир бротхер фелт
      аутхоризед бы суцх цоммендатион то тхинк оф хер ас хе цхосе.




      цхаптер 5

      уитхин а схорт уалк оф лонгбоурн ливед а фамилы уитх ухом тхе
      беннетс уере партицуларлы интимате. сир уиллиам луцас хад беен
      формерлы ин траде ин мерытон, ухере хе хад маде а толерабле
      фортуне, анд рисен то тхе хоноур оф книгхтхоод бы ан аддресс то
      тхе кинг дуринг хис маыоралты. тхе дистинцтион хад перхапс беен
      фелт тоо стронглы. ит хад гивен хим а дисгуст то хис бусинесс,
      анд то хис ресиденце ин а смалл маркет тоун; анд, ин кууиттинг
      тхем ботх, хе хад ремовед уитх хис фамилы то а хоусе абоут а миле
      фром мерытон, деноминатед фром тхат период луцас лодге, ухере хе
      цоулд тхинк уитх плеасуре оф хис оун импортанце, анд, унсхацклед
      бы бусинесс, оццупы химселф солелы ин беинг цивил то алл тхе
      уорлд. фор, тхоугх елатед бы хис ранк, ит дид нот рендер хим
      суперцилиоус; он тхе цонтрары, хе уас алл аттентион то еверыбоды.
      бы натуре иноффенсиве, фриендлы, анд облигинг, хис пресентатион
      ат ст. жамес’с хад маде хим цоуртеоус.

      лады луцас уас а веры гоод кинд оф уоман, нот тоо цлевер то бе а
      валуабле неигхбоур то мрс. беннет. тхеы хад северал цхилдрен. тхе
      елдест оф тхем, а сенсибле, интеллигент ыоунг уоман, абоут
      туенты-севен, уас елизабетх’с интимате фриенд.

      тхат тхе мисс луцасес анд тхе мисс беннетс схоулд меет то талк
      овер а балл уас абсолутелы нецессары; анд тхе морнинг афтер тхе
      ассемблы броугхт тхе формер то лонгбоурн то хеар анд то
      цоммуницате.

      “_ыоу_ беган тхе евенинг уелл, цхарлотте,” саид мрс. беннет уитх
      цивил селф-цомманд то мисс луцас. “_ыоу_ уере мр. бинглеы’с фирст
      цхоице.”

      “ыес; бут хе сеемед то лике хис сецонд беттер.”

      “ох! ыоу меан жане, и суппосе, бецаусе хе данцед уитх хер туице.
      то бе суре тхат _дид_ сеем ас иф хе адмиред хер—индеед и ратхер
      белиеве хе _дид_—и хеард сометхинг абоут ит—бут и хардлы кноу
      ухат—сометхинг абоут мр. робинсон.”

      “перхапс ыоу меан ухат и оверхеард бетуеен хим анд мр. робинсон;
      дид нот и ментион ит то ыоу? мр. робинсон’с аскинг хим хоу хе
      ликед оур мерытон ассемблиес, анд ухетхер хе дид нот тхинк тхере
      уере а греат маны претты уомен ин тхе роом, анд _ухицх_ хе
      тхоугхт тхе преттиест? анд хис ансуеринг иммедиателы то тхе ласт
      кууестион: ‘ох! тхе елдест мисс беннет, беыонд а доубт; тхере
      цаннот бе туо опинионс он тхат поинт.’”

      “упон мы уорд! уелл, тхат ис веры децидед индеед—тхат доес сеем
      ас иф—бут, хоуевер, ит маы алл цоме то нотхинг, ыоу кноу.”

      “_мы_ оверхеарингс уере море то тхе пурпосе тхан _ыоурс_, елиза,”
      саид цхарлотте. “мр. дарцы ис нот со уелл уортх листенинг то ас
      хис фриенд, ис хе?—поор елиза!—то бе онлы жуст _толерабле_.”

      “и бег ыоу уоулд нот пут ит инто лиззы’с хеад то бе вексед бы хис
      илл-треатмент, фор хе ис суцх а дисагрееабле ман, тхат ит уоулд
      бе кууите а мисфортуне то бе ликед бы хим. мрс. лонг толд ме ласт
      нигхт тхат хе сат цлосе то хер фор халф-ан-хоур уитхоут онце
      опенинг хис липс.”

      “аре ыоу кууите суре, ма’ам?—ис нот тхере а литтле мистаке?” саид
      жане. “и цертаинлы сау мр. дарцы спеакинг то хер.”

      “аые—бецаусе схе аскед хим ат ласт хоу хе ликед нетхерфиелд, анд
      хе цоулд нот хелп ансуеринг хер; бут схе саид хе сеемед кууите
      ангры ат беинг споке то.”

      “мисс бинглеы толд ме,” саид жане, “тхат хе невер спеакс муцх,
      унлесс амонг хис интимате ацкууаинтанцес. уитх _тхем_ хе ис
      ремаркаблы агрееабле.”

      “и до нот белиеве а уорд оф ит, мы деар. иф хе хад беен со веры
      агрееабле, хе уоулд хаве талкед то мрс. лонг. бут и цан гуесс хоу
      ит уас; еверыбоды саыс тхат хе ис еат уп уитх приде, анд и даре
      саы хе хад хеард сомехоу тхат мрс. лонг доес нот кееп а царриаге,
      анд хад цоме то тхе балл ин а хацк цхаисе.”

      “и до нот минд хис нот талкинг то мрс. лонг,” саид мисс луцас,
      “бут и уисх хе хад данцед уитх елиза.”

      “анотхер тиме, лиззы,” саид хер мотхер, “и уоулд нот данце уитх
      _хим_, иф и уере ыоу.”

      “и белиеве, ма’ам, и маы сафелы промисе ыоу _невер_ то данце уитх
      хим.”

      “хис приде,” саид мисс луцас, “доес нот оффенд _ме_ со муцх ас
      приде офтен доес, бецаусе тхере ис ан ексцусе фор ит. оне цаннот
      уондер тхат со веры фине а ыоунг ман, уитх фамилы, фортуне,
      еверытхинг ин хис фавоур, схоулд тхинк хигхлы оф химселф. иф и
      маы со експресс ит, хе хас а _ригхт_ то бе проуд.”

      “тхат ис веры труе,” реплиед елизабетх, “анд и цоулд еасилы
      форгиве _хис_ приде, иф хе хад нот мортифиед _мине_.”

      “приде,” обсервед мары, ухо пикууед херселф упон тхе солидиты оф
      хер рефлецтионс, “ис а веры цоммон фаилинг, и белиеве. бы алл
      тхат и хаве евер реад, и ам цонвинцед тхат ит ис веры цоммон
      индеед; тхат хуман натуре ис партицуларлы проне то ит, анд тхат
      тхере аре веры феу оф ус ухо до нот цхерисх а феелинг оф
      селф-цомплаценцы он тхе сцоре оф соме кууалиты ор отхер, реал ор
      имагинары. ваниты анд приде аре дифферент тхингс, тхоугх тхе
      уордс аре офтен усед сынонымоуслы. а персон маы бе проуд уитхоут
      беинг ваин. приде релатес море то оур опинион оф оурселвес,
      ваниты то ухат уе уоулд хаве отхерс тхинк оф ус.”

      “иф и уере ас рицх ас мр. дарцы,” цриед а ыоунг луцас, ухо цаме
      уитх хис систерс, “и схоулд нот царе хоу проуд и уас. и уоулд
      кееп а пацк оф фоксхоундс, анд дринк а боттле оф уине а даы.”

      “тхен ыоу уоулд дринк а греат деал море тхан ыоу оугхт,” саид
      мрс. беннет; “анд иф и уере то сее ыоу ат ит, и схоулд таке ауаы
      ыоур боттле дирецтлы.”

      тхе боы протестед тхат схе схоулд нот; схе цонтинуед то децларе
      тхат схе уоулд, анд тхе аргумент ендед онлы уитх тхе висит.




      цхаптер 6

      тхе ладиес оф лонгбоурн соон уаитед он тхосе оф нетхерфиелд. тхе
      висит уас соон ретурнед ин дуе форм. мисс беннет’с плеасинг
      маннерс греу он тхе гоодуилл оф мрс. хурст анд мисс бинглеы; анд
      тхоугх тхе мотхер уас фоунд то бе интолерабле, анд тхе ыоунгер
      систерс нот уортх спеакинг то, а уисх оф беинг беттер ацкууаинтед
      уитх _тхем_ уас експрессед тоуардс тхе туо елдест. бы жане, тхис
      аттентион уас рецеивед уитх тхе греатест плеасуре, бут елизабетх
      стилл сау суперцилиоуснесс ин тхеир треатмент оф еверыбоды,
      хардлы ексцептинг евен хер систер, анд цоулд нот лике тхем; тхоугх
      тхеир кинднесс то жане, суцх ас ит уас, хад а валуе ас арисинг ин
      алл пробабилиты фром тхе инфлуенце оф тхеир бротхер’с адмиратион.
      ит уас генераллы евидент ухеневер тхеы мет, тхат хе _дид_ адмире
      хер анд то _хер_ ит уас екууаллы евидент тхат жане уас ыиелдинг то
      тхе преференце ухицх схе хад бегун то ентертаин фор хим фром тхе
      фирст, анд уас ин а уаы то бе веры муцх ин лове; бут схе
      цонсидеред уитх плеасуре тхат ит уас нот ликелы то бе дисцоверед
      бы тхе уорлд ин генерал, синце жане унитед, уитх греат стренгтх
      оф феелинг, а цомпосуре оф темпер анд а униформ цхеерфулнесс оф
      маннер ухицх уоулд гуард хер фром тхе суспиционс оф тхе
      импертинент. схе ментионед тхис то хер фриенд мисс луцас.

      “ит маы перхапс бе плеасант,” реплиед цхарлотте, “то бе абле то
      импосе он тхе публиц ин суцх а цасе; бут ит ис сометимес а
      дисадвантаге то бе со веры гуардед. иф а уоман цонцеалс хер
      аффецтион уитх тхе саме скилл фром тхе обжецт оф ит, схе маы лосе
      тхе оппортуниты оф фиксинг хим; анд ит уилл тхен бе бут поор
      цонсолатион то белиеве тхе уорлд екууаллы ин тхе дарк. тхере ис со
      муцх оф гратитуде ор ваниты ин алмост еверы аттацхмент, тхат ит
      ис нот сафе то леаве аны то итселф. уе цан алл _бегин_ фреелы—а
      слигхт преференце ис натурал еноугх; бут тхере аре веры феу оф ус
      ухо хаве хеарт еноугх то бе реаллы ин лове уитхоут енцоурагемент.
      ин нине цасес оут оф тен а уоман хад беттер схоу _море_ аффецтион
      тхан схе феелс. бинглеы ликес ыоур систер ундоубтедлы; бут хе маы
      невер до море тхан лике хер, иф схе доес нот хелп хим он.”

      “бут схе доес хелп хим он, ас муцх ас хер натуре уилл аллоу. иф
      _и_ цан перцеиве хер регард фор хим, хе муст бе а симплетон,
      индеед, нот то дисцовер ит тоо.”

      “ремембер, елиза, тхат хе доес нот кноу жане’с диспоситион ас ыоу
      до.”

      “бут иф а уоман ис партиал то а ман, анд доес нот ендеавоур то
      цонцеал ит, хе муст финд ит оут.”

      “перхапс хе муст, иф хе сеес еноугх оф хер. бут, тхоугх бинглеы
      анд жане меет толераблы офтен, ит ис невер фор маны хоурс
      тогетхер; анд, ас тхеы алуаыс сее еацх отхер ин ларге миксед
      партиес, ит ис импоссибле тхат еверы момент схоулд бе емплоыед ин
      цонверсинг тогетхер. жане схоулд тхерефоре маке тхе мост оф еверы
      халф-хоур ин ухицх схе цан цомманд хис аттентион. ухен схе ис
      сецуре оф хим, тхере уилл бе море леисуре фор фаллинг ин лове ас
      муцх ас схе цхоосес.”

      “ыоур план ис а гоод оне,” реплиед елизабетх, “ухере нотхинг ис
      ин кууестион бут тхе десире оф беинг уелл марриед, анд иф и уере
      детерминед то гет а рицх хусбанд, ор аны хусбанд, и даре саы и
      схоулд адопт ит. бут тхесе аре нот жане’с феелингс; схе ис нот
      ацтинг бы десигн. ас ыет, схе цаннот евен бе цертаин оф тхе
      дегрее оф хер оун регард нор оф итс реасонабленесс. схе хас кноун
      хим онлы а фортнигхт. схе данцед фоур данцес уитх хим ат мерытон;
      схе сау хим оне морнинг ат хис оун хоусе, анд хас синце динед
      уитх хим ин цомпаны фоур тимес. тхис ис нот кууите еноугх то маке
      хер ундерстанд хис цхарацтер.”

      “нот ас ыоу репресент ит. хад схе мерелы _динед_ уитх хим, схе
      мигхт онлы хаве дисцоверед ухетхер хе хад а гоод аппетите; бут
      ыоу муст ремембер тхат фоур евенингс хаве алсо беен спент
      тогетхер—анд фоур евенингс маы до а греат деал.”

      “ыес; тхесе фоур евенингс хаве енаблед тхем то асцертаин тхат
      тхеы ботх лике вингт-ун беттер тхан цоммерце; бут уитх респецт то
      аны отхер леадинг цхарацтеристиц, и до нот имагине тхат муцх хас
      беен унфолдед.”

      “уелл,” саид цхарлотте, “и уисх жане суццесс уитх алл мы хеарт;
      анд иф схе уере марриед то хим то-морроу, и схоулд тхинк схе хад
      ас гоод а цханце оф хаппинесс ас иф схе уере то бе студыинг хис
      цхарацтер фор а туелвемонтх. хаппинесс ин марриаге ис ентирелы а
      маттер оф цханце. иф тхе диспоситионс оф тхе партиес аре евер со
      уелл кноун то еацх отхер ор евер со симилар бефореханд, ит доес
      нот адванце тхеир фелициты ин тхе леаст. тхеы алуаыс цонтинуе то
      гроу суффициентлы унлике афтеруардс то хаве тхеир схаре оф
      вексатион; анд ит ис беттер то кноу ас литтле ас поссибле оф тхе
      дефецтс оф тхе персон уитх ухом ыоу аре то пасс ыоур лифе.”

      “ыоу маке ме лаугх, цхарлотте; бут ит ис нот соунд. ыоу кноу ит
      ис нот соунд, анд тхат ыоу уоулд невер ацт ин тхис уаы ыоурселф.”

      оццупиед ин обсервинг мр. бинглеы’с аттентионс то хер систер,
      елизабетх уас фар фром суспецтинг тхат схе уас херселф бецоминг
      ан обжецт оф соме интерест ин тхе еыес оф хис фриенд. мр. дарцы
      хад ат фирст сцарцелы аллоуед хер то бе претты; хе хад лоокед ат
      хер уитхоут адмиратион ат тхе балл; анд ухен тхеы некст мет, хе
      лоокед ат хер онлы то цритицисе. бут но соонер хад хе маде ит
      цлеар то химселф анд хис фриендс тхат схе хардлы хад а гоод
      феатуре ин хер фаце, тхан хе беган то финд ит уас рендеред
      унцоммонлы интеллигент бы тхе беаутифул експрессион оф хер дарк
      еыес. то тхис дисцоверы суццеедед соме отхерс екууаллы мортифыинг.
      тхоугх хе хад детецтед уитх а цритицал еые море тхан оне фаилуре
      оф перфецт сымметры ин хер форм, хе уас форцед то ацкноуледге хер
      фигуре то бе лигхт анд плеасинг; анд ин спите оф хис ассертинг
      тхат хер маннерс уере нот тхосе оф тхе фасхионабле уорлд, хе уас
      цаугхт бы тхеир еасы плаыфулнесс. оф тхис схе уас перфецтлы
      унауаре; то хер хе уас онлы тхе ман ухо маде химселф агрееабле
      ноухере, анд ухо хад нот тхоугхт хер хандсоме еноугх то данце
      уитх.

      хе беган то уисх то кноу море оф хер, анд ас а степ тоуардс
      цонверсинг уитх хер химселф, аттендед то хер цонверсатион уитх
      отхерс. хис доинг со дреу хер нотице. ит уас ат сир уиллиам
      луцас’с, ухере а ларге парты уере ассемблед.

      “ухат доес мр. дарцы меан,” саид схе то цхарлотте, “бы листенинг
      то мы цонверсатион уитх цолонел форстер?”

      “тхат ис а кууестион ухицх мр. дарцы онлы цан ансуер.”

      “бут иф хе доес ит аны море и схалл цертаинлы лет хим кноу тхат и
      сее ухат хе ис абоут. хе хас а веры сатирицал еые, анд иф и до
      нот бегин бы беинг импертинент мыселф, и схалл соон гроу афраид
      оф хим.”

      он хис аппроацхинг тхем соон афтеруардс, тхоугх уитхоут сееминг
      то хаве аны интентион оф спеакинг, мисс луцас дефиед хер фриенд
      то ментион суцх а субжецт то хим; ухицх иммедиателы провокинг
      елизабетх то до ит, схе турнед то хим анд саид:

      “дид ыоу нот тхинк, мр. дарцы, тхат и експрессед мыселф унцоммонлы
      уелл жуст ноу, ухен и уас теасинг цолонел форстер то гиве ус а
      балл ат мерытон?”

      “уитх греат енергы; бут ит ис алуаыс а субжецт ухицх макес а лады
      енергетиц.”

      “ыоу аре севере он ус.”

      “ит уилл бе _хер_ турн соон то бе теасед,” саид мисс луцас. “и ам
      гоинг то опен тхе инструмент, елиза, анд ыоу кноу ухат фоллоус.”

      “ыоу аре а веры странге цреатуре бы уаы оф а фриенд!—алуаыс
      уантинг ме то плаы анд синг бефоре аныбоды анд еверыбоды! иф мы
      ваниты хад такен а мусицал турн, ыоу уоулд хаве беен инвалуабле;
      бут ас ит ис, и уоулд реаллы ратхер нот сит доун бефоре тхосе ухо
      муст бе ин тхе хабит оф хеаринг тхе веры бест перформерс.” он
      мисс луцас’с персеверинг, хоуевер, схе аддед, “веры уелл, иф ит
      муст бе со, ит муст.” анд гравелы гланцинг ат мр. дарцы, “тхере
      ис а фине олд саыинг, ухицх еверыбоды хере ис оф цоурсе фамилиар
      уитх: ‘кееп ыоур бреатх то цоол ыоур порридге’; анд и схалл кееп
      мине то суелл мы сонг.”

      хер перформанце уас плеасинг, тхоугх бы но меанс цапитал. афтер а
      сонг ор туо, анд бефоре схе цоулд реплы то тхе ентреатиес оф
      северал тхат схе уоулд синг агаин, схе уас еагерлы суццеедед ат
      тхе инструмент бы хер систер мары, ухо хавинг, ин цонсекууенце оф
      беинг тхе онлы плаин оне ин тхе фамилы, уоркед хард фор кноуледге
      анд аццомплисхментс, уас алуаыс импатиент фор дисплаы.

      мары хад неитхер гениус нор тасте; анд тхоугх ваниты хад гивен
      хер апплицатион, ит хад гивен хер ликеуисе а педантиц аир анд
      цонцеитед маннер, ухицх уоулд хаве инжуред а хигхер дегрее оф
      ексцелленце тхан схе хад реацхед. елизабетх, еасы анд унаффецтед,
      хад беен листенед то уитх муцх море плеасуре, тхоугх нот плаыинг
      халф со уелл; анд мары, ат тхе енд оф а лонг цонцерто, уас глад
      то пурцхасе праисе анд гратитуде бы сцотцх анд ирисх аирс, ат тхе
      рекууест оф хер ыоунгер систерс, ухо, уитх соме оф тхе луцасес,
      анд туо ор тхрее оффицерс, жоинед еагерлы ин данцинг ат оне енд
      оф тхе роом.

      мр. дарцы стоод неар тхем ин силент индигнатион ат суцх а моде оф
      пассинг тхе евенинг, то тхе ексцлусион оф алл цонверсатион, анд
      уас тоо муцх енгроссед бы хис тхоугхтс то перцеиве тхат сир
      уиллиам луцас уас хис неигхбоур, тилл сир уиллиам тхус беган:

      “ухат а цхарминг амусемент фор ыоунг пеопле тхис ис, мр. дарцы!
      тхере ис нотхинг лике данцинг афтер алл. и цонсидер ит ас оне оф
      тхе фирст рефинементс оф полисхед социеты.”

      “цертаинлы, сир; анд ит хас тхе адвантаге алсо оф беинг ин вогуе
      амонгст тхе лесс полисхед социетиес оф тхе уорлд. еверы саваге
      цан данце.”

      сир уиллиам онлы смилед. “ыоур фриенд перформс делигхтфуллы,” хе
      цонтинуед афтер а паусе, он сееинг бинглеы жоин тхе гроуп; “анд и
      доубт нот тхат ыоу аре ан адепт ин тхе сциенце ыоурселф, мр.
      дарцы.”

      “ыоу сау ме данце ат мерытон, и белиеве, сир.”

      “ыес, индеед, анд рецеивед но инцонсидерабле плеасуре фром тхе
      сигхт. до ыоу офтен данце ат ст. жамес’с?”

      “невер, сир.”

      “до ыоу нот тхинк ит уоулд бе а пропер цомплимент то тхе плаце?”

      “ит ис а цомплимент ухицх и невер паы то аны плаце иф и цан авоид
      ит.”

      “ыоу хаве а хоусе ин тоун, и цонцлуде?”

      мр. дарцы боуед.

      “и хад онце хад соме тхоугхт оф фиксинг ин тоун мыселф—фор и ам
      фонд оф супериор социеты; бут и дид нот феел кууите цертаин тхат
      тхе аир оф лондон уоулд агрее уитх лады луцас.”

      хе паусед ин хопес оф ан ансуер; бут хис цомпанион уас нот
      диспосед то маке аны; анд елизабетх ат тхат инстант мовинг
      тоуардс тхем, хе уас струцк уитх тхе ацтион оф доинг а веры
      галлант тхинг, анд цаллед оут то хер:

      “мы деар мисс елиза, ухы аре ыоу нот данцинг? мр. дарцы, ыоу муст
      аллоу ме то пресент тхис ыоунг лады то ыоу ас а веры десирабле
      партнер. ыоу цаннот рефусе то данце, и ам суре ухен со муцх
      беауты ис бефоре ыоу.” анд, такинг хер ханд, хе уоулд хаве гивен
      ит то мр. дарцы ухо, тхоугх екстремелы сурприсед, уас нот
      унуиллинг то рецеиве ит, ухен схе инстантлы дреу бацк, анд саид
      уитх соме дисцомпосуре то сир уиллиам:

      “индеед, сир, и хаве нот тхе леаст интентион оф данцинг. и
      ентреат ыоу нот то суппосе тхат и мовед тхис уаы ин ордер то бег
      фор а партнер.”

      мр. дарцы, уитх граве проприеты, рекууестед то бе аллоуед тхе
      хоноур оф хер ханд, бут ин ваин. елизабетх уас детерминед; нор
      дид сир уиллиам ат алл схаке хер пурпосе бы хис аттемпт ат
      персуасион.

      “ыоу ексцел со муцх ин тхе данце, мисс елиза, тхат ит ис цруел то
      дены ме тхе хаппинесс оф сееинг ыоу; анд тхоугх тхис гентлеман
      дисликес тхе амусемент ин генерал, хе цан хаве но обжецтион, и ам
      суре, то облиге ус фор оне халф-хоур.”

      “мр. дарцы ис алл политенесс,” саид елизабетх, смилинг.

      “хе ис, индеед; бут, цонсидеринг тхе индуцемент, мы деар мисс
      елиза, уе цаннот уондер ат хис цомплаисанце—фор ухо уоулд обжецт
      то суцх а партнер?”

      елизабетх лоокед арцхлы, анд турнед ауаы. хер ресистанце хад нот
      инжуред хер уитх тхе гентлеман, анд хе уас тхинкинг оф хер уитх
      соме цомплаценцы, ухен тхус аццостед бы мисс бинглеы:

      “и цан гуесс тхе субжецт оф ыоур реверие.”

      “и схоулд имагине нот.”

      “ыоу аре цонсидеринг хоу инсуппортабле ит уоулд бе то пасс маны
      евенингс ин тхис маннер—ин суцх социеты; анд индеед и ам кууите оф
      ыоур опинион. и уас невер море анноыед! тхе инсипидиты, анд ыет
      тхе ноисе—тхе нотхингнесс, анд ыет тхе селф-импортанце оф алл
      тхосе пеопле! ухат уоулд и гиве то хеар ыоур стрицтурес он тхем!”

      “ыоур цонжецтуре ис тоталлы уронг, и ассуре ыоу. мы минд уас море
      агрееаблы енгагед. и хаве беен медитатинг он тхе веры греат
      плеасуре ухицх а паир оф фине еыес ин тхе фаце оф а претты уоман
      цан бестоу.”

      мисс бинглеы иммедиателы фиксед хер еыес он хис фаце, анд десиред
      хе уоулд телл хер ухат лады хад тхе цредит оф инспиринг суцх
      рефлецтионс. мр. дарцы реплиед уитх греат интрепидиты:

      “мисс елизабетх беннет.”

      “мисс елизабетх беннет!” репеатед мисс бинглеы. “и ам алл
      астонисхмент. хоу лонг хас схе беен суцх а фавоурите?—анд праы,
      ухен ам и то уисх ыоу жоы?”

      “тхат ис ексацтлы тхе кууестион ухицх и експецтед ыоу то аск. а
      лады’с имагинатион ис веры рапид; ит жумпс фром адмиратион то
      лове, фром лове то матримоны, ин а момент. и кнеу ыоу уоулд бе
      уисхинг ме жоы.”

      “наы, иф ыоу аре сериоус абоут ит, и схалл цонсидер тхе маттер ис
      абсолутелы сеттлед. ыоу уилл бе хавинг а цхарминг мотхер-ин-лау,
      индеед; анд, оф цоурсе, схе уилл алуаыс бе ат пемберлеы уитх
      ыоу.”

      хе листенед то хер уитх перфецт индифференце ухиле схе цхосе то
      ентертаин херселф ин тхис маннер; анд ас хис цомпосуре цонвинцед
      хер тхат алл уас сафе, хер уит флоуед лонг.




      цхаптер 7

      мр. беннет’с проперты цонсистед алмост ентирелы ин ан естате оф
      туо тхоусанд а ыеар, ухицх, унфортунателы фор хис даугхтерс, уас
      ентаилед, ин дефаулт оф хеирс мале, он а дистант релатион; анд
      тхеир мотхер’с фортуне, тхоугх ампле фор хер ситуатион ин лифе,
      цоулд бут илл супплы тхе дефициенцы оф хис. хер фатхер хад беен
      ан атторнеы ин мерытон, анд хад лефт хер фоур тхоусанд поундс.

      схе хад а систер марриед то а мр. пхиллипс, ухо хад беен а цлерк
      то тхеир фатхер анд суццеедед хим ин тхе бусинесс, анд а бротхер
      сеттлед ин лондон ин а респецтабле лине оф траде.

      тхе виллаге оф лонгбоурн уас онлы оне миле фром мерытон; а мост
      цонвениент дистанце фор тхе ыоунг ладиес, ухо уере усуаллы
      темптед тхитхер тхрее ор фоур тимес а уеек, то паы тхеир дуты то
      тхеир аунт анд то а миллинер’с схоп жуст овер тхе уаы. тхе туо
      ыоунгест оф тхе фамилы, цатхерине анд лыдиа, уере партицуларлы
      фрекууент ин тхесе аттентионс; тхеир миндс уере море вацант тхан
      тхеир систерс’, анд ухен нотхинг беттер офферед, а уалк то
      мерытон уас нецессары то амусе тхеир морнинг хоурс анд фурнисх
      цонверсатион фор тхе евенинг; анд хоуевер баре оф неус тхе
      цоунтры ин генерал мигхт бе, тхеы алуаыс цонтривед то леарн соме
      фром тхеир аунт. ат пресент, индеед, тхеы уере уелл супплиед ботх
      уитх неус анд хаппинесс бы тхе рецент арривал оф а милитиа
      регимент ин тхе неигхбоурхоод; ит уас то ремаин тхе ухоле уинтер,
      анд мерытон уас тхе хеадкууартерс.

      тхеир виситс то мрс. пхиллипс уере ноу продуцтиве оф тхе мост
      интерестинг интеллигенце. еверы даы аддед сометхинг то тхеир
      кноуледге оф тхе оффицерс’ намес анд цоннецтионс. тхеир лодгингс
      уере нот лонг а сецрет, анд ат ленгтх тхеы беган то кноу тхе
      оффицерс тхемселвес. мр. пхиллипс виситед тхем алл, анд тхис
      опенед то хис ниецес а сторе оф фелициты ункноун бефоре. тхеы
      цоулд талк оф нотхинг бут оффицерс; анд мр. бинглеы’с ларге
      фортуне, тхе ментион оф ухицх гаве аниматион то тхеир мотхер, уас
      уортхлесс ин тхеир еыес ухен оппосед то тхе регименталс оф ан
      енсигн.

      афтер листенинг оне морнинг то тхеир еффусионс он тхис субжецт,
      мр. беннет цооллы обсервед:

      “фром алл тхат и цан цоллецт бы ыоур маннер оф талкинг, ыоу муст
      бе туо оф тхе силлиест гирлс ин тхе цоунтры. и хаве суспецтед ит
      соме тиме, бут и ам ноу цонвинцед.”

      цатхерине уас дисцонцертед, анд маде но ансуер; бут лыдиа, уитх
      перфецт индифференце, цонтинуед то експресс хер адмиратион оф
      цаптаин цартер, анд хер хопе оф сееинг хим ин тхе цоурсе оф тхе
      даы, ас хе уас гоинг тхе некст морнинг то лондон.

      “и ам астонисхед, мы деар,” саид мрс. беннет, “тхат ыоу схоулд бе
      со реады то тхинк ыоур оун цхилдрен силлы. иф и уисхед то тхинк
      слигхтинглы оф аныбоды’с цхилдрен, ит схоулд нот бе оф мы оун,
      хоуевер.”

      “иф мы цхилдрен аре силлы, и муст хопе то бе алуаыс сенсибле оф
      ит.”

      “ыес—бут ас ит хаппенс, тхеы аре алл оф тхем веры цлевер.”

      “тхис ис тхе онлы поинт, и флаттер мыселф, он ухицх уе до нот
      агрее. и хад хопед тхат оур сентиментс цоинцидед ин еверы
      партицулар, бут и муст со фар диффер фром ыоу ас то тхинк оур туо
      ыоунгест даугхтерс унцоммонлы фоолисх.”

      “мы деар мр. беннет, ыоу муст нот експецт суцх гирлс то хаве тхе
      сенсе оф тхеир фатхер анд мотхер. ухен тхеы гет то оур аге, и
      даре саы тхеы уилл нот тхинк абоут оффицерс аны море тхан уе до.
      и ремембер тхе тиме ухен и ликед а ред цоат мыселф веры уелл—анд,
      индеед, со и до стилл ат мы хеарт; анд иф а смарт ыоунг цолонел,
      уитх фиве ор сикс тхоусанд а ыеар, схоулд уант оне оф мы гирлс и
      схалл нот саы наы то хим; анд и тхоугхт цолонел форстер лоокед
      веры бецоминг тхе отхер нигхт ат сир уиллиам’с ин хис
      регименталс.”

      “мамма,” цриед лыдиа, “мы аунт саыс тхат цолонел форстер анд
      цаптаин цартер до нот го со офтен то мисс уатсон’с ас тхеы дид
      ухен тхеы фирст цаме; схе сеес тхем ноу веры офтен стандинг ин
      цларке’с либрары.”

      мрс. беннет уас превентед реплыинг бы тхе ентранце оф тхе фоотман
      уитх а ноте фор мисс беннет; ит цаме фром нетхерфиелд, анд тхе
      сервант уаитед фор ан ансуер. мрс. беннет’с еыес спарклед уитх
      плеасуре, анд схе уас еагерлы цаллинг оут, ухиле хер даугхтер
      реад,

      “уелл, жане, ухо ис ит фром? ухат ис ит абоут? ухат доес хе саы?
      уелл, жане, маке хасте анд телл ус; маке хасте, мы лове.”

      “ит ис фром мисс бинглеы,” саид жане, анд тхен реад ит алоуд.

      “мы деар фриенд,—
      “иф ыоу аре нот со цомпассионате ас то дине то-даы уитх лоуиса
      анд ме, уе схалл бе ин дангер оф хатинг еацх отхер фор тхе рест
      оф оур ливес, фор а ухоле даы’с _тте--тте_ бетуеен туо уомен
      цан невер енд уитхоут а кууаррел. цоме ас соон ас ыоу цан он
      рецеипт оф тхис. мы бротхер анд тхе гентлемен аре то дине уитх
      тхе оффицерс.—ыоурс евер,

      “царолине бинглеы”

      “уитх тхе оффицерс!” цриед лыдиа. “и уондер мы аунт дид нот телл
      ус оф _тхат_.”

      “дининг оут,” саид мрс. беннет, “тхат ис веры унлуцкы.”

      “цан и хаве тхе царриаге?” саид жане.

      “но, мы деар, ыоу хад беттер го он хорсебацк, бецаусе ит сеемс
      ликелы то раин; анд тхен ыоу муст стаы алл нигхт.”

      “тхат уоулд бе а гоод сцхеме,” саид елизабетх, “иф ыоу уере суре
      тхат тхеы уоулд нот оффер то сенд хер хоме.”

      “ох! бут тхе гентлемен уилл хаве мр. бинглеы’с цхаисе то го то
      мерытон, анд тхе хурстс хаве но хорсес то тхеирс.”

      “и хад муцх ратхер го ин тхе цоацх.”

      “бут, мы деар, ыоур фатхер цаннот спаре тхе хорсес, и ам суре.
      тхеы аре уантед ин тхе фарм, мр. беннет, аре тхеы нот?”

      “тхеы аре уантед ин тхе фарм муцх офтенер тхан и цан гет тхем.”

      “бут иф ыоу хаве гот тхем то-даы,” саид елизабетх, “мы мотхер’с
      пурпосе уилл бе ансуеред.”

      схе дид ат ласт ексторт фром хер фатхер ан ацкноуледгмент тхат тхе
      хорсес уере енгагед. жане уас тхерефоре облигед то го он
      хорсебацк, анд хер мотхер аттендед хер то тхе доор уитх маны
      цхеерфул прогностицс оф а бад даы. хер хопес уере ансуеред; жане
      хад нот беен гоне лонг бефоре ит раинед хард. хер систерс уере
      унеасы фор хер, бут хер мотхер уас делигхтед. тхе раин цонтинуед
      тхе ухоле евенинг уитхоут интермиссион; жане цертаинлы цоулд нот
      цоме бацк.

      “тхис уас а луцкы идеа оф мине, индеед!” саид мрс. беннет море
      тхан онце, ас иф тхе цредит оф макинг ит раин уере алл хер оун.
      тилл тхе некст морнинг, хоуевер, схе уас нот ауаре оф алл тхе
      фелициты оф хер цонтриванце. бреакфаст уас сцарцелы овер ухен а
      сервант фром нетхерфиелд броугхт тхе фоллоуинг ноте фор
      елизабетх:

      “мы деарест лиззы,—
      “и финд мыселф веры унуелл тхис морнинг, ухицх, и суппосе, ис то
      бе импутед то мы геттинг ует тхроугх ыестердаы. мы кинд фриендс
      уилл нот хеар оф мы ретурнинг тилл и ам беттер. тхеы инсист алсо
      он мы сееинг мр. жонес—тхерефоре до нот бе алармед иф ыоу схоулд
      хеар оф хис хавинг беен то ме—анд, ексцептинг а соре тхроат анд
      хеадацхе, тхере ис нот муцх тхе маттер уитх ме.—ыоурс, етц.”

      “уелл, мы деар,” саид мр. беннет, ухен елизабетх хад реад тхе
      ноте алоуд, “иф ыоур даугхтер схоулд хаве а дангероус фит оф
      иллнесс—иф схе схоулд дие, ит уоулд бе а цомфорт то кноу тхат ит
      уас алл ин пурсуит оф мр. бинглеы, анд ундер ыоур ордерс.”

      “ох! и ам нот афраид оф хер дыинг. пеопле до нот дие оф литтле
      трифлинг цолдс. схе уилл бе такен гоод царе оф. ас лонг ас схе
      стаыс тхере, ит ис алл веры уелл. и уоулд го анд сее хер иф и
      цоулд хаве тхе царриаге.”

      елизабетх, феелинг реаллы анксиоус, уас детерминед то го то хер,
      тхоугх тхе царриаге уас нот то бе хад; анд ас схе уас но
      хорсеуоман, уалкинг уас хер онлы алтернативе. схе децларед хер
      ресолутион.

      “хоу цан ыоу бе со силлы,” цриед хер мотхер, “ас то тхинк оф суцх
      а тхинг, ин алл тхис дирт! ыоу уилл нот бе фит то бе сеен ухен
      ыоу гет тхере.”

      “и схалл бе веры фит то сее жане—ухицх ис алл и уант.”

      “ис тхис а хинт то ме, лиззы,” саид хер фатхер, “то сенд фор тхе
      хорсес?”

      “но, индеед, и до нот уисх то авоид тхе уалк. тхе дистанце ис
      нотхинг ухен оне хас а мотиве; онлы тхрее милес. и схалл бе бацк
      бы диннер.”

      “и адмире тхе ацтивиты оф ыоур беневоленце,” обсервед мары, “бут
      еверы импулсе оф феелинг схоулд бе гуидед бы реасон; анд, ин мы
      опинион, ексертион схоулд алуаыс бе ин пропортион то ухат ис
      рекууиред.”

      “уе уилл го ас фар ас мерытон уитх ыоу,” саид цатхерине анд
      лыдиа. елизабетх аццептед тхеир цомпаны, анд тхе тхрее ыоунг
      ладиес сет офф тогетхер.

      “иф уе маке хасте,” саид лыдиа, ас тхеы уалкед алонг, “перхапс уе
      маы сее сометхинг оф цаптаин цартер бефоре хе гоес.”

      ин мерытон тхеы партед; тхе туо ыоунгест репаиред то тхе лодгингс
      оф оне оф тхе оффицерс’ уивес, анд елизабетх цонтинуед хер уалк
      алоне, цроссинг фиелд афтер фиелд ат а кууицк паце, жумпинг овер
      стилес анд спрингинг овер пуддлес уитх импатиент ацтивиты, анд
      финдинг херселф ат ласт уитхин виеу оф тхе хоусе, уитх уеары
      анклес, дирты стоцкингс, анд а фаце глоуинг уитх тхе уармтх оф
      ексерцисе.

      схе уас схоун инто тхе бреакфаст-парлоур, ухере алл бут жане уере
      ассемблед, анд ухере хер аппеаранце цреатед а греат деал оф
      сурприсе. тхат схе схоулд хаве уалкед тхрее милес со еарлы ин тхе
      даы, ин суцх дирты уеатхер, анд бы херселф, уас алмост инцредибле
      то мрс. хурст анд мисс бинглеы; анд елизабетх уас цонвинцед тхат
      тхеы хелд хер ин цонтемпт фор ит. схе уас рецеивед, хоуевер, веры
      полителы бы тхем; анд ин тхеир бротхер’с маннерс тхере уас
      сометхинг беттер тхан политенесс; тхере уас гоод хумоур анд
      кинднесс. мр. дарцы саид веры литтле, анд мр. хурст нотхинг ат
      алл. тхе формер уас дивидед бетуеен адмиратион оф тхе бриллианцы
      ухицх ексерцисе хад гивен то хер цомплексион, анд доубт ас то тхе
      оццасион’с жустифыинг хер цоминг со фар алоне. тхе латтер уас
      тхинкинг онлы оф хис бреакфаст.

      хер инкууириес афтер хер систер уере нот веры фавоураблы ансуеред.
      мисс беннет хад слепт илл, анд тхоугх уп, уас веры феверисх, анд
      нот уелл еноугх то леаве хер роом. елизабетх уас глад то бе такен
      то хер иммедиателы; анд жане, ухо хад онлы беен уитххелд бы тхе
      феар оф гивинг аларм ор инцонвениенце фром експрессинг ин хер ноте
      хоу муцх схе лонгед фор суцх а висит, уас делигхтед ат хер
      ентранце. схе уас нот екууал, хоуевер, то муцх цонверсатион, анд
      ухен мисс бинглеы лефт тхем тогетхер, цоулд аттемпт литтле
      бесидес експрессионс оф гратитуде фор тхе екстраординары кинднесс
      схе уас треатед уитх. елизабетх силентлы аттендед хер.

      ухен бреакфаст уас овер тхеы уере жоинед бы тхе систерс; анд
      елизабетх беган то лике тхем херселф, ухен схе сау хоу муцх
      аффецтион анд солицитуде тхеы схоуед фор жане. тхе апотхецары
      цаме, анд хавинг ексаминед хис патиент, саид, ас мигхт бе
      суппосед, тхат схе хад цаугхт а виолент цолд, анд тхат тхеы муст
      ендеавоур то гет тхе беттер оф ит; адвисед хер то ретурн то бед,
      анд промисед хер соме драугхтс. тхе адвице уас фоллоуед реадилы,
      фор тхе феверисх сымптомс инцреасед, анд хер хеад ацхед ацутелы.
      елизабетх дид нот кууит хер роом фор а момент; нор уере тхе отхер
      ладиес офтен абсент; тхе гентлемен беинг оут, тхеы хад, ин фацт,
      нотхинг то до елсеухере.

      ухен тхе цлоцк струцк тхрее, елизабетх фелт тхат схе муст го, анд
      веры унуиллинглы саид со. мисс бинглеы офферед хер тхе царриаге,
      анд схе онлы уантед а литтле прессинг то аццепт ит, ухен жане
      тестифиед суцх цонцерн ин партинг уитх хер, тхат мисс бинглеы уас
      облигед то цонверт тхе оффер оф тхе цхаисе то ан инвитатион то
      ремаин ат нетхерфиелд фор тхе пресент. елизабетх мост тханкфуллы
      цонсентед, анд а сервант уас диспатцхед то лонгбоурн то ацкууаинт
      тхе фамилы уитх хер стаы анд бринг бацк а супплы оф цлотхес.




      цхаптер 8

      ат фиве о’цлоцк тхе туо ладиес ретиред то дресс, анд ат халф-паст
      сикс елизабетх уас суммонед то диннер. то тхе цивил инкууириес
      ухицх тхен поуред ин, анд амонгст ухицх схе хад тхе плеасуре оф
      дистингуисхинг тхе муцх супериор солицитуде оф мр. бинглеы’с, схе
      цоулд нот маке а веры фавоурабле ансуер. жане уас бы но меанс
      беттер. тхе систерс, он хеаринг тхис, репеатед тхрее ор фоур
      тимес хоу муцх тхеы уере гриевед, хоу схоцкинг ит уас то хаве а
      бад цолд, анд хоу ексцессивелы тхеы дисликед беинг илл тхемселвес;
      анд тхен тхоугхт но море оф тхе маттер: анд тхеир индифференце
      тоуардс жане ухен нот иммедиателы бефоре тхем ресторед елизабетх
      то тхе енжоымент оф алл хер формер дислике.

      тхеир бротхер, индеед, уас тхе онлы оне оф тхе парты ухом схе
      цоулд регард уитх аны цомплаценцы. хис анксиеты фор жане уас
      евидент, анд хис аттентионс то херселф мост плеасинг, анд тхеы
      превентед хер феелинг херселф со муцх ан интрудер ас схе белиевед
      схе уас цонсидеред бы тхе отхерс. схе хад веры литтле нотице фром
      аны бут хим. мисс бинглеы уас енгроссед бы мр. дарцы, хер систер
      сцарцелы лесс со; анд ас фор мр. хурст, бы ухом елизабетх сат, хе
      уас ан индолент ман, ухо ливед онлы то еат, дринк, анд плаы ат
      цардс; ухо, ухен хе фоунд хер то префер а плаин дисх то а рагоут,
      хад нотхинг то саы то хер.

      ухен диннер уас овер, схе ретурнед дирецтлы то жане, анд мисс
      бинглеы беган абусинг хер ас соон ас схе уас оут оф тхе роом. хер
      маннерс уере проноунцед то бе веры бад индеед, а микстуре оф приде
      анд импертиненце; схе хад но цонверсатион, но стыле, но беауты.
      мрс. хурст тхоугхт тхе саме, анд аддед:

      “схе хас нотхинг, ин схорт, то рецомменд хер, бут беинг ан
      ексцеллент уалкер. и схалл невер форгет хер аппеаранце тхис
      морнинг. схе реаллы лоокед алмост уилд.”

      “схе дид, индеед, лоуиса. и цоулд хардлы кееп мы цоунтенанце.
      веры нонсенсицал то цоме ат алл! ухы муст _схе_ бе сцамперинг
      абоут тхе цоунтры, бецаусе хер систер хад а цолд? хер хаир, со
      унтиды, со блоусы!”

      “ыес, анд хер петтицоат; и хопе ыоу сау хер петтицоат, сикс инцхес
      дееп ин муд, и ам абсолутелы цертаин; анд тхе гоун ухицх хад беен
      лет доун то хиде ит нот доинг итс оффице.”

      “ыоур пицтуре маы бе веры ексацт, лоуиса,” саид бинглеы; “бут тхис
      уас алл лост упон ме. и тхоугхт мисс елизабетх беннет лоокед
      ремаркаблы уелл ухен схе цаме инто тхе роом тхис морнинг. хер
      дирты петтицоат кууите есцапед мы нотице.”

      “_ыоу_ обсервед ит, мр. дарцы, и ам суре,” саид мисс бинглеы;
      “анд и ам инцлинед то тхинк тхат ыоу уоулд нот уисх то сее _ыоур
      систер_ маке суцх ан ексхибитион.”

      “цертаинлы нот.”

      “то уалк тхрее милес, ор фоур милес, ор фиве милес, ор ухатевер
      ит ис, абове хер анклес ин дирт, анд алоне, кууите алоне! ухат
      цоулд схе меан бы ит? ит сеемс то ме то схоу ан абоминабле сорт
      оф цонцеитед индепенденце, а мост цоунтры-тоун индифференце то
      децорум.”

      “ит схоус ан аффецтион фор хер систер тхат ис веры плеасинг,”
      саид бинглеы.

      “и ам афраид, мр. дарцы,” обсервед мисс бинглеы ин а халф
      ухиспер, “тхат тхис адвентуре хас ратхер аффецтед ыоур адмиратион
      оф хер фине еыес.”

      “нот ат алл,” хе реплиед; “тхеы уере бригхтенед бы тхе ексерцисе.”
      а схорт паусе фоллоуед тхис спеецх, анд мрс. хурст беган агаин:

      “и хаве ан ексцессиве регард фор мисс жане беннет, схе ис реаллы а
      веры суеет гирл, анд и уисх уитх алл мы хеарт схе уере уелл
      сеттлед. бут уитх суцх а фатхер анд мотхер, анд суцх лоу
      цоннецтионс, и ам афраид тхере ис но цханце оф ит.”

      “и тхинк и хаве хеард ыоу саы тхат тхеир унцле ис ан атторнеы ин
      мерытон.”

      “ыес; анд тхеы хаве анотхер, ухо ливес сомеухере неар цхеапсиде.”

      “тхат ис цапитал,” аддед хер систер, анд тхеы ботх лаугхед
      хеартилы.

      “иф тхеы хад унцлес еноугх то филл _алл_ цхеапсиде,” цриед
      бинглеы, “ит уоулд нот маке тхем оне жот лесс агрееабле.”

      “бут ит муст веры материаллы лессен тхеир цханце оф маррыинг мен
      оф аны цонсидератион ин тхе уорлд,” реплиед дарцы.

      то тхис спеецх бинглеы маде но ансуер; бут хис систерс гаве ит
      тхеир хеарты ассент, анд индулгед тхеир миртх фор соме тиме ат
      тхе експенсе оф тхеир деар фриенд’с вулгар релатионс.

      уитх а ренеуал оф тендернесс, хоуевер, тхеы ретурнед то хер роом
      он леавинг тхе дининг-парлоур, анд сат уитх хер тилл суммонед то
      цоффее. схе уас стилл веры поорлы, анд елизабетх уоулд нот кууит
      хер ат алл, тилл лате ин тхе евенинг, ухен схе хад тхе цомфорт оф
      сееинг хер слееп, анд ухен ит сеемед то хер ратхер ригхт тхан
      плеасант тхат схе схоулд го доунстаирс херселф. он ентеринг тхе
      драуинг-роом схе фоунд тхе ухоле парты ат лоо, анд уас
      иммедиателы инвитед то жоин тхем; бут суспецтинг тхем то бе
      плаыинг хигх схе децлинед ит, анд макинг хер систер тхе ексцусе,
      саид схе уоулд амусе херселф фор тхе схорт тиме схе цоулд стаы
      белоу, уитх а боок. мр. хурст лоокед ат хер уитх астонисхмент.

      “до ыоу префер реадинг то цардс?” саид хе; “тхат ис ратхер
      сингулар.”

      “мисс елиза беннет,” саид мисс бинглеы, “десписес цардс. схе ис а
      греат реадер, анд хас но плеасуре ин анытхинг елсе.”

      “и десерве неитхер суцх праисе нор суцх ценсуре,” цриед
      елизабетх; “и ам _нот_ а греат реадер, анд и хаве плеасуре ин
      маны тхингс.”

      “ин нурсинг ыоур систер и ам суре ыоу хаве плеасуре,” саид
      бинглеы; “анд и хопе ит уилл бе соон инцреасед бы сееинг хер
      кууите уелл.”

      елизабетх тханкед хим фром хер хеарт, анд тхен уалкед тоуардс тхе
      табле ухере а феу боокс уере лыинг. хе иммедиателы офферед то
      фетцх хер отхерс—алл тхат хис либрары аффордед.

      “анд и уисх мы цоллецтион уере ларгер фор ыоур бенефит анд мы оун
      цредит; бут и ам ан идле феллоу, анд тхоугх и хаве нот маны, и
      хаве море тхан и евер лоокед инто.”

      елизабетх ассуред хим тхат схе цоулд суит херселф перфецтлы уитх
      тхосе ин тхе роом.

      “и ам астонисхед,” саид мисс бинглеы, “тхат мы фатхер схоулд хаве
      лефт со смалл а цоллецтион оф боокс. ухат а делигхтфул либрары
      ыоу хаве ат пемберлеы, мр. дарцы!”

      “ит оугхт то бе гоод,” хе реплиед, “ит хас беен тхе уорк оф маны
      генератионс.”

      “анд тхен ыоу хаве аддед со муцх то ит ыоурселф, ыоу аре алуаыс
      буыинг боокс.”

      “и цаннот цомпрехенд тхе неглецт оф а фамилы либрары ин суцх даыс
      ас тхесе.”

      “неглецт! и ам суре ыоу неглецт нотхинг тхат цан адд то тхе
      беаутиес оф тхат нобле плаце. цхарлес, ухен ыоу буилд _ыоур_
      хоусе, и уисх ит маы бе халф ас делигхтфул ас пемберлеы.”

      “и уисх ит маы.”

      “бут и уоулд реаллы адвисе ыоу то маке ыоур пурцхасе ин тхат
      неигхбоурхоод, анд таке пемберлеы фор а кинд оф модел. тхере ис
      нот а финер цоунты ин енгланд тхан дербысхире.”

      “уитх алл мы хеарт; и уилл буы пемберлеы итселф иф дарцы уилл
      селл ит.”

      “и ам талкинг оф поссибилитиес, цхарлес.”

      “упон мы уорд, царолине, и схоулд тхинк ит море поссибле то гет
      пемберлеы бы пурцхасе тхан бы имитатион.”

      елизабетх уас со муцх цаугхт уитх ухат пассед, ас то леаве хер
      веры литтле аттентион фор хер боок; анд соон лаыинг ит ухоллы
      асиде, схе дреу неар тхе цард-табле, анд статионед херселф
      бетуеен мр. бинглеы анд хис елдест систер, то обсерве тхе гаме.

      “ис мисс дарцы муцх гроун синце тхе спринг?” саид мисс бинглеы;
      “уилл схе бе ас талл ас и ам?”

      “и тхинк схе уилл. схе ис ноу абоут мисс елизабетх беннет’с
      хеигхт, ор ратхер таллер.”

      “хоу и лонг то сее хер агаин! и невер мет уитх аныбоды ухо
      делигхтед ме со муцх. суцх а цоунтенанце, суцх маннерс! анд со
      екстремелы аццомплисхед фор хер аге! хер перформанце он тхе
      пианофорте ис екскууисите.”

      “ит ис амазинг то ме,” саид бинглеы, “хоу ыоунг ладиес цан хаве
      патиенце то бе со веры аццомплисхед ас тхеы алл аре.”

      “алл ыоунг ладиес аццомплисхед! мы деар цхарлес, ухат до ыоу
      меан?”

      “ыес, алл оф тхем, и тхинк. тхеы алл паинт таблес, цовер сцреенс,
      анд нет пурсес. и сцарцелы кноу аныоне ухо цаннот до алл тхис,
      анд и ам суре и невер хеард а ыоунг лады спокен оф фор тхе фирст
      тиме, уитхоут беинг информед тхат схе уас веры аццомплисхед.”

      “ыоур лист оф тхе цоммон екстент оф аццомплисхментс,” саид дарцы,
      “хас тоо муцх трутх. тхе уорд ис апплиед то маны а уоман ухо
      десервес ит но отхеруисе тхан бы неттинг а пурсе ор цоверинг а
      сцреен. бут и ам веры фар фром агрееинг уитх ыоу ин ыоур
      естиматион оф ладиес ин генерал. и цаннот боаст оф кноуинг море
      тхан халф-а-дозен, ин тхе ухоле ранге оф мы ацкууаинтанце, тхат
      аре реаллы аццомплисхед.”

      “нор и, и ам суре,” саид мисс бинглеы.

      “тхен,” обсервед елизабетх, “ыоу муст цомпрехенд а греат деал ин
      ыоур идеа оф ан аццомплисхед уоман.”

      “ыес, и до цомпрехенд а греат деал ин ит.”

      “ох! цертаинлы,” цриед хис фаитхфул ассистант, “но оне цан бе
      реаллы естеемед аццомплисхед ухо доес нот греатлы сурпасс ухат ис
      усуаллы мет уитх. а уоман муст хаве а тхороугх кноуледге оф
      мусиц, сингинг, драуинг, данцинг, анд тхе модерн лангуагес, то
      десерве тхе уорд; анд бесидес алл тхис, схе муст поссесс а
      цертаин сометхинг ин хер аир анд маннер оф уалкинг, тхе тоне оф
      хер воице, хер аддресс анд експрессионс, ор тхе уорд уилл бе бут
      халф-десервед.”

      “алл тхис схе муст поссесс,” аддед дарцы, “анд то алл тхис схе
      муст ыет адд сометхинг море субстантиал, ин тхе импровемент оф
      хер минд бы екстенсиве реадинг.”

      “и ам но лонгер сурприсед ат ыоур кноуинг _онлы_ сикс аццомплисхед
      уомен. и ратхер уондер ноу ат ыоур кноуинг _аны_.”

      “аре ыоу со севере упон ыоур оун секс ас то доубт тхе поссибилиты
      оф алл тхис?”

      “_и_ невер сау суцх а уоман. _и_ невер сау суцх цапациты, анд
      тасте, анд апплицатион, анд елеганце, ас ыоу десцрибе унитед.”

      мрс. хурст анд мисс бинглеы ботх цриед оут агаинст тхе инжустице
      оф хер имплиед доубт, анд уере ботх протестинг тхат тхеы кнеу
      маны уомен ухо ансуеред тхис десцриптион, ухен мр. хурст цаллед
      тхем то ордер, уитх биттер цомплаинтс оф тхеир инаттентион то
      ухат уас гоинг форуард. ас алл цонверсатион уас тхеребы ат ан
      енд, елизабетх соон афтеруардс лефт тхе роом.

      “елизабетх беннет,” саид мисс бинглеы, ухен тхе доор уас цлосед
      он хер, “ис оне оф тхосе ыоунг ладиес ухо сеек то рецомменд
      тхемселвес то тхе отхер секс бы ундервалуинг тхеир оун; анд уитх
      маны мен, и даре саы, ит суццеедс. бут, ин мы опинион, ит ис а
      палтры девице, а веры меан арт.”

      “ундоубтедлы,” реплиед дарцы, то ухом тхис ремарк уас цхиефлы
      аддрессед, “тхере ис а меаннесс ин _алл_ тхе артс ухицх ладиес
      сометимес цондесценд то емплоы фор цаптиватион. ухатевер беарс
      аффиниты то цуннинг ис деспицабле.”

      мисс бинглеы уас нот со ентирелы сатисфиед уитх тхис реплы ас то
      цонтинуе тхе субжецт.

      елизабетх жоинед тхем агаин онлы то саы тхат хер систер уас
      уорсе, анд тхат схе цоулд нот леаве хер. бинглеы ургед мр. жонес
      беинг сент фор иммедиателы; ухиле хис систерс, цонвинцед тхат но
      цоунтры адвице цоулд бе оф аны сервице, рецоммендед ан експресс то
      тоун фор оне оф тхе мост еминент пхысицианс. тхис схе уоулд нот
      хеар оф; бут схе уас нот со унуиллинг то цомплы уитх тхеир
      бротхер’с пропосал; анд ит уас сеттлед тхат мр. жонес схоулд бе
      сент фор еарлы ин тхе морнинг, иф мисс беннет уере нот децидедлы
      беттер. бинглеы уас кууите унцомфортабле; хис систерс децларед
      тхат тхеы уере мисерабле. тхеы солацед тхеир уретцхеднесс,
      хоуевер, бы дуетс афтер суппер, ухиле хе цоулд финд но беттер
      релиеф то хис феелингс тхан бы гивинг хис хоусекеепер дирецтионс
      тхат еверы аттентион мигхт бе паид то тхе сицк лады анд хер
      систер.




      цхаптер 9

      елизабетх пассед тхе цхиеф оф тхе нигхт ин хер систер’с роом, анд
      ин тхе морнинг хад тхе плеасуре оф беинг абле то сенд а толерабле
      ансуер то тхе инкууириес ухицх схе веры еарлы рецеивед фром мр.
      бинглеы бы а хоусемаид, анд соме тиме афтеруардс фром тхе туо
      елегант ладиес ухо уаитед он хис систерс. ин спите оф тхис
      амендмент, хоуевер, схе рекууестед то хаве а ноте сент то
      лонгбоурн, десиринг хер мотхер то висит жане, анд форм хер оун
      жудгемент оф хер ситуатион. тхе ноте уас иммедиателы диспатцхед,
      анд итс цонтентс ас кууицклы цомплиед уитх. мрс. беннет,
      аццомпаниед бы хер туо ыоунгест гирлс, реацхед нетхерфиелд соон
      афтер тхе фамилы бреакфаст.

      хад схе фоунд жане ин аны аппарент дангер, мрс. беннет уоулд хаве
      беен веры мисерабле; бут беинг сатисфиед он сееинг хер тхат хер
      иллнесс уас нот аларминг, схе хад но уисх оф хер рецоверинг
      иммедиателы, ас хер ресторатион то хеалтх уоулд пробаблы ремове
      хер фром нетхерфиелд. схе уоулд нот листен, тхерефоре, то хер
      даугхтер’с пропосал оф беинг царриед хоме; неитхер дид тхе
      апотхецары, ухо арривед абоут тхе саме тиме, тхинк ит ат алл
      адвисабле. афтер ситтинг а литтле ухиле уитх жане, он мисс
      бинглеы’с аппеаранце анд инвитатион, тхе мотхер анд тхрее
      даугхтерс алл аттендед хер инто тхе бреакфаст парлоур. бинглеы
      мет тхем уитх хопес тхат мрс. беннет хад нот фоунд мисс беннет
      уорсе тхан схе експецтед.

      “индеед и хаве, сир,” уас хер ансуер. “схе ис а греат деал тоо
      илл то бе мовед. мр. жонес саыс уе муст нот тхинк оф мовинг хер.
      уе муст треспасс а литтле лонгер он ыоур кинднесс.”

      “ремовед!” цриед бинглеы. “ит муст нот бе тхоугхт оф. мы систер,
      и ам суре, уилл нот хеар оф хер ремовал.”

      “ыоу маы депенд упон ит, мадам,” саид мисс бинглеы, уитх цолд
      цивилиты, “тхат мисс беннет уилл рецеиве еверы поссибле аттентион
      ухиле схе ремаинс уитх ус.”

      мрс. беннет уас профусе ин хер ацкноуледгментс.

      “и ам суре,” схе аддед, “иф ит уас нот фор суцх гоод фриендс и до
      нот кноу ухат уоулд бецоме оф хер, фор схе ис веры илл индеед,
      анд суфферс а васт деал, тхоугх уитх тхе греатест патиенце ин тхе
      уорлд, ухицх ис алуаыс тхе уаы уитх хер, фор схе хас, уитхоут
      ексцептион, тхе суеетест темпер и хаве евер мет уитх. и офтен телл
      мы отхер гирлс тхеы аре нотхинг то _хер_. ыоу хаве а суеет роом
      хере, мр. бинглеы, анд а цхарминг проспецт овер тхе гравел уалк.
      и до нот кноу а плаце ин тхе цоунтры тхат ис екууал то
      нетхерфиелд. ыоу уилл нот тхинк оф кууиттинг ит ин а хурры, и
      хопе, тхоугх ыоу хаве бут а схорт леасе.”

      “ухатевер и до ис доне ин а хурры,” реплиед хе; “анд тхерефоре иф
      и схоулд ресолве то кууит нетхерфиелд, и схоулд пробаблы бе офф ин
      фиве минутес. ат пресент, хоуевер, и цонсидер мыселф ас кууите
      фиксед хере.”

      “тхат ис ексацтлы ухат и схоулд хаве суппосед оф ыоу,” саид
      елизабетх.

      “ыоу бегин то цомпрехенд ме, до ыоу?” цриед хе, турнинг тоуардс
      хер.

      “ох! ыес—и ундерстанд ыоу перфецтлы.”

      “и уисх и мигхт таке тхис фор а цомплимент; бут то бе со еасилы
      сеен тхроугх и ам афраид ис питифул.”

      “тхат ис ас ит хаппенс. ит доес нот фоллоу тхат а дееп, интрицате
      цхарацтер ис море ор лесс естимабле тхан суцх а оне ас ыоурс.”

      “лиззы,” цриед хер мотхер, “ремембер ухере ыоу аре, анд до нот
      рун он ин тхе уилд маннер тхат ыоу аре суфферед то до ат хоме.”

      “и дид нот кноу бефоре,” цонтинуед бинглеы иммедиателы, “тхат ыоу
      уере а студиер оф цхарацтер. ит муст бе ан амусинг студы.”

      “ыес, бут интрицате цхарацтерс аре тхе _мост_ амусинг. тхеы хаве
      ат леаст тхат адвантаге.”

      “тхе цоунтры,” саид дарцы, “цан ин генерал супплы бут а феу
      субжецтс фор суцх а студы. ин а цоунтры неигхбоурхоод ыоу мове ин
      а веры цонфинед анд унварыинг социеты.”

      “бут пеопле тхемселвес алтер со муцх, тхат тхере ис сометхинг неу
      то бе обсервед ин тхем фор евер.”

      “ыес, индеед,” цриед мрс. беннет, оффендед бы хис маннер оф
      ментионинг а цоунтры неигхбоурхоод. “и ассуре ыоу тхере ис кууите
      ас муцх оф _тхат_ гоинг он ин тхе цоунтры ас ин тоун.”

      еверыбоды уас сурприсед, анд дарцы, афтер лоокинг ат хер фор а
      момент, турнед силентлы ауаы. мрс. беннет, ухо фанциед схе хад
      гаинед а цомплете вицторы овер хим, цонтинуед хер триумпх.

      “и цаннот сее тхат лондон хас аны греат адвантаге овер тхе
      цоунтры, фор мы парт, ексцепт тхе схопс анд публиц плацес. тхе
      цоунтры ис а васт деал плеасантер, ис ит нот, мр. бинглеы?”

      “ухен и ам ин тхе цоунтры,” хе реплиед, “и невер уисх то леаве
      ит; анд ухен и ам ин тоун ит ис претты муцх тхе саме. тхеы хаве
      еацх тхеир адвантагес, анд и цан бе екууаллы хаппы ин еитхер.”

      “аые—тхат ис бецаусе ыоу хаве тхе ригхт диспоситион. бут тхат
      гентлеман,” лоокинг ат дарцы, “сеемед то тхинк тхе цоунтры уас
      нотхинг ат алл.”

      “индеед, мамма, ыоу аре мистакен,” саид елизабетх, блусхинг фор
      хер мотхер. “ыоу кууите мистоок мр. дарцы. хе онлы меант тхат
      тхере уас нот суцх а вариеты оф пеопле то бе мет уитх ин тхе
      цоунтры ас ин тхе тоун, ухицх ыоу муст ацкноуледге то бе труе.”

      “цертаинлы, мы деар, нободы саид тхере уере; бут ас то нот
      меетинг уитх маны пеопле ин тхис неигхбоурхоод, и белиеве тхере
      аре феу неигхбоурхоодс ларгер. и кноу уе дине уитх
      фоур-анд-туенты фамилиес.”

      нотхинг бут цонцерн фор елизабетх цоулд енабле бинглеы то кееп
      хис цоунтенанце. хис систер уас лесс делицате, анд дирецтед хер
      еыес тоуардс мр. дарцы уитх а веры експрессиве смиле. елизабетх,
      фор тхе саке оф саыинг сометхинг тхат мигхт турн хер мотхер’с
      тхоугхтс, ноу аскед хер иф цхарлотте луцас хад беен ат лонгбоурн
      синце _хер_ цоминг ауаы.

      “ыес, схе цаллед ыестердаы уитх хер фатхер. ухат ан агрееабле ман
      сир уиллиам ис, мр. бинглеы, ис нот хе? со муцх тхе ман оф
      фасхион! со гентеел анд еасы! хе хас алуаыс сометхинг то саы то
      еверыбоды. _тхат_ ис мы идеа оф гоод бреединг; анд тхосе персонс
      ухо фанцы тхемселвес веры импортант, анд невер опен тхеир моутхс,
      кууите мистаке тхе маттер.”

      “дид цхарлотте дине уитх ыоу?”

      “но, схе уоулд го хоме. и фанцы схе уас уантед абоут тхе
      минце-пиес. фор мы парт, мр. бинглеы, _и_ алуаыс кееп сервантс
      тхат цан до тхеир оун уорк; _мы_ даугхтерс аре броугхт уп веры
      дифферентлы. бут еверыбоды ис то жудге фор тхемселвес, анд тхе
      луцасес аре а веры гоод сорт оф гирлс, и ассуре ыоу. ит ис а питы
      тхеы аре нот хандсоме! нот тхат _и_ тхинк цхарлотте со _веры_
      плаин—бут тхен схе ис оур партицулар фриенд.”

      “схе сеемс а веры плеасант ыоунг уоман.”

      “ох! деар, ыес; бут ыоу муст оун схе ис веры плаин. лады луцас
      херселф хас офтен саид со, анд енвиед ме жане’с беауты. и до нот
      лике то боаст оф мы оун цхилд, бут то бе суре, жане—оне доес нот
      офтен сее аныбоды беттер лоокинг. ит ис ухат еверыбоды саыс. и до
      нот труст мы оун партиалиты. ухен схе уас онлы фифтеен, тхере уас
      а ман ат мы бротхер гардинер’с ин тоун со муцх ин лове уитх хер
      тхат мы систер-ин-лау уас суре хе уоулд маке хер ан оффер бефоре
      уе цаме ауаы. бут, хоуевер, хе дид нот. перхапс хе тхоугхт хер
      тоо ыоунг. хоуевер, хе уроте соме версес он хер, анд веры претты
      тхеы уере.”

      “анд со ендед хис аффецтион,” саид елизабетх импатиентлы. “тхере
      хас беен маны а оне, и фанцы, оверцоме ин тхе саме уаы. и уондер
      ухо фирст дисцоверед тхе еффицацы оф поетры ин дривинг ауаы
      лове!”

      “и хаве беен усед то цонсидер поетры ас тхе _фоод_ оф лове,” саид
      дарцы.

      “оф а фине, стоут, хеалтхы лове ит маы. еверытхинг ноурисхес ухат
      ис стронг алреады. бут иф ит бе онлы а слигхт, тхин сорт оф
      инцлинатион, и ам цонвинцед тхат оне гоод соннет уилл старве ит
      ентирелы ауаы.”

      дарцы онлы смилед; анд тхе генерал паусе ухицх енсуед маде
      елизабетх трембле лест хер мотхер схоулд бе експосинг херселф
      агаин. схе лонгед то спеак, бут цоулд тхинк оф нотхинг то саы;
      анд афтер а схорт силенце мрс. беннет беган репеатинг хер тханкс
      то мр. бинглеы фор хис кинднесс то жане, уитх ан апологы фор
      троублинг хим алсо уитх лиззы. мр. бинглеы уас унаффецтедлы цивил
      ин хис ансуер, анд форцед хис ыоунгер систер то бе цивил алсо,
      анд саы ухат тхе оццасион рекууиред. схе перформед хер парт индеед
      уитхоут муцх грациоуснесс, бут мрс. беннет уас сатисфиед, анд
      соон афтеруардс ордеред хер царриаге. упон тхис сигнал, тхе
      ыоунгест оф хер даугхтерс пут херселф форуард. тхе туо гирлс хад
      беен ухисперинг то еацх отхер дуринг тхе ухоле висит, анд тхе
      ресулт оф ит уас, тхат тхе ыоунгест схоулд такс мр. бинглеы уитх
      хавинг промисед он хис фирст цоминг инто тхе цоунтры то гиве а
      балл ат нетхерфиелд.

      лыдиа уас а стоут, уелл-гроун гирл оф фифтеен, уитх а фине
      цомплексион анд гоод-хумоуред цоунтенанце; а фавоурите уитх хер
      мотхер, ухосе аффецтион хад броугхт хер инто публиц ат ан еарлы
      аге. схе хад хигх анимал спиритс, анд а сорт оф натурал
      селф-цонсекууенце, ухицх тхе аттентион оф тхе оффицерс, то ухом
      хер унцле’с гоод диннерс, анд хер оун еасы маннерс рецоммендед
      хер, хад инцреасед инто ассуранце. схе уас веры екууал, тхерефоре,
      то аддресс мр. бинглеы он тхе субжецт оф тхе балл, анд абруптлы
      реминдед хим оф хис промисе; аддинг, тхат ит уоулд бе тхе мост
      схамефул тхинг ин тхе уорлд иф хе дид нот кееп ит. хис ансуер то
      тхис судден аттацк уас делигхтфул то тхеир мотхер’с еар:

      “и ам перфецтлы реады, и ассуре ыоу, то кееп мы енгагемент; анд
      ухен ыоур систер ис рецоверед, ыоу схалл, иф ыоу плеасе, наме тхе
      веры даы оф тхе балл. бут ыоу уоулд нот уисх то бе данцинг ухен
      схе ис илл.”

      лыдиа децларед херселф сатисфиед. “ох! ыес—ит уоулд бе муцх
      беттер то уаит тилл жане уас уелл, анд бы тхат тиме мост ликелы
      цаптаин цартер уоулд бе ат мерытон агаин. анд ухен ыоу хаве гивен
      _ыоур_ балл,” схе аддед, “и схалл инсист он тхеир гивинг оне
      алсо. и схалл телл цолонел форстер ит уилл бе кууите а схаме иф хе
      доес нот.”

      мрс. беннет анд хер даугхтерс тхен департед, анд елизабетх
      ретурнед инстантлы то жане, леавинг хер оун анд хер релатионс’
      бехавиоур то тхе ремаркс оф тхе туо ладиес анд мр. дарцы; тхе
      латтер оф ухом, хоуевер, цоулд нот бе преваилед он то жоин ин
      тхеир ценсуре оф _хер_, ин спите оф алл мисс бинглеы’с уиттицисмс
      он _фине еыес_.




      цхаптер 10

      тхе даы пассед муцх ас тхе даы бефоре хад доне. мрс. хурст анд
      мисс бинглеы хад спент соме хоурс оф тхе морнинг уитх тхе
      инвалид, ухо цонтинуед, тхоугх слоулы, то менд; анд ин тхе
      евенинг елизабетх жоинед тхеир парты ин тхе драуинг-роом. тхе
      лоо-табле, хоуевер, дид нот аппеар. мр. дарцы уас уритинг, анд
      мисс бинглеы, сеатед неар хим, уас уатцхинг тхе прогресс оф хис
      леттер анд репеатедлы цаллинг офф хис аттентион бы мессагес то
      хис систер. мр. хурст анд мр. бинглеы уере ат пикуует, анд мрс.
      хурст уас обсервинг тхеир гаме.

      елизабетх тоок уп соме неедлеуорк, анд уас суффициентлы амусед ин
      аттендинг то ухат пассед бетуеен дарцы анд хис цомпанион. тхе
      перпетуал цоммендатионс оф тхе лады, еитхер он хис хандуритинг,
      ор он тхе евеннесс оф хис линес, ор он тхе ленгтх оф хис леттер,
      уитх тхе перфецт унцонцерн уитх ухицх хер праисес уере рецеивед,
      формед а цуриоус диалогуе, анд уас ексацтлы ин унион уитх хер
      опинион оф еацх.

      “хоу делигхтед мисс дарцы уилл бе то рецеиве суцх а леттер!”

      хе маде но ансуер.

      “ыоу урите унцоммонлы фаст.”

      “ыоу аре мистакен. и урите ратхер слоулы.”

      “хоу маны леттерс ыоу муст хаве оццасион то урите ин тхе цоурсе
      оф а ыеар! леттерс оф бусинесс, тоо! хоу одиоус и схоулд тхинк
      тхем!”

      “ит ис фортунате, тхен, тхат тхеы фалл то мы лот инстеад оф
      ыоурс.”

      “праы телл ыоур систер тхат и лонг то сее хер.”

      “и хаве алреады толд хер со онце, бы ыоур десире.”

      “и ам афраид ыоу до нот лике ыоур пен. лет ме менд ит фор ыоу. и
      менд пенс ремаркаблы уелл.”

      “тханк ыоу—бут и алуаыс менд мы оун.”

      “хоу цан ыоу цонтриве то урите со евен?”

      хе уас силент.

      “телл ыоур систер и ам делигхтед то хеар оф хер импровемент он
      тхе харп; анд праы лет хер кноу тхат и ам кууите ин раптурес уитх
      хер беаутифул литтле десигн фор а табле, анд и тхинк ит
      инфинителы супериор то мисс грантлеы’с.”

      “уилл ыоу гиве ме леаве то дефер ыоур раптурес тилл и урите
      агаин? ат пресент и хаве нот роом то до тхем жустице.”

      “ох! ит ис оф но цонсекууенце. и схалл сее хер ин жануары. бут до
      ыоу алуаыс урите суцх цхарминг лонг леттерс то хер, мр. дарцы?”

      “тхеы аре генераллы лонг; бут ухетхер алуаыс цхарминг ит ис нот
      фор ме то детермине.”

      “ит ис а руле уитх ме, тхат а персон ухо цан урите а лонг леттер
      уитх еасе, цаннот урите илл.”

      “тхат уилл нот до фор а цомплимент то дарцы, царолине,” цриед хер
      бротхер, “бецаусе хе доес _нот_ урите уитх еасе. хе студиес тоо
      муцх фор уордс оф фоур сыллаблес. до нот ыоу, дарцы?”

      “мы стыле оф уритинг ис веры дифферент фром ыоурс.”

      “ох!” цриед мисс бинглеы, “цхарлес уритес ин тхе мост царелесс
      уаы имагинабле. хе леавес оут халф хис уордс, анд блотс тхе
      рест.”

      “мы идеас флоу со рапидлы тхат и хаве нот тиме то експресс тхем—бы
      ухицх меанс мы леттерс сометимес цонвеы но идеас ат алл то мы
      цорреспондентс.”

      “ыоур хумилиты, мр. бинглеы,” саид елизабетх, “муст дисарм
      репрооф.”

      “нотхинг ис море децеитфул,” саид дарцы, “тхан тхе аппеаранце оф
      хумилиты. ит ис офтен онлы царелесснесс оф опинион, анд сометимес
      ан индирецт боаст.”

      “анд ухицх оф тхе туо до ыоу цалл _мы_ литтле рецент пиеце оф
      модесты?”

      “тхе индирецт боаст; фор ыоу аре реаллы проуд оф ыоур дефецтс ин
      уритинг, бецаусе ыоу цонсидер тхем ас процеединг фром а рапидиты
      оф тхоугхт анд царелесснесс оф ексецутион, ухицх, иф нот
      естимабле, ыоу тхинк ат леаст хигхлы интерестинг. тхе поуер оф
      доинг анытхинг уитх кууицкнесс ис алуаыс призед муцх бы тхе
      поссессор, анд офтен уитхоут аны аттентион то тхе имперфецтион оф
      тхе перформанце. ухен ыоу толд мрс. беннет тхис морнинг тхат иф
      ыоу евер ресолвед упон кууиттинг нетхерфиелд ыоу схоулд бе гоне ин
      фиве минутес, ыоу меант ит то бе а сорт оф панегыриц, оф
      цомплимент то ыоурселф—анд ыет ухат ис тхере со веры лаудабле ин
      а преципитанце ухицх муст леаве веры нецессары бусинесс ундоне,
      анд цан бе оф но реал адвантаге то ыоурселф ор аныоне елсе?”

      “наы,” цриед бинглеы, “тхис ис тоо муцх, то ремембер ат нигхт алл
      тхе фоолисх тхингс тхат уере саид ин тхе морнинг. анд ыет, упон
      мы хоноур, и белиеве ухат и саид оф мыселф то бе труе, анд и
      белиеве ит ат тхис момент. ат леаст, тхерефоре, и дид нот ассуме
      тхе цхарацтер оф неедлесс преципитанце мерелы то схоу офф бефоре
      тхе ладиес.”

      “и даре саы ыоу белиевед ит; бут и ам бы но меанс цонвинцед тхат
      ыоу уоулд бе гоне уитх суцх целериты. ыоур цондуцт уоулд бе кууите
      ас депендент он цханце ас тхат оф аны ман и кноу; анд иф, ас ыоу
      уере моунтинг ыоур хорсе, а фриенд уере то саы, ‘бинглеы, ыоу хад
      беттер стаы тилл некст уеек,’ ыоу уоулд пробаблы до ит, ыоу уоулд
      пробаблы нот го—анд ат анотхер уорд, мигхт стаы а монтх.”

      “ыоу хаве онлы провед бы тхис,” цриед елизабетх, “тхат мр.
      бинглеы дид нот до жустице то хис оун диспоситион. ыоу хаве схоун
      хим офф ноу муцх море тхан хе дид химселф.”

      “и ам ексцеединглы гратифиед,” саид бинглеы, “бы ыоур цонвертинг
      ухат мы фриенд саыс инто а цомплимент он тхе суеетнесс оф мы
      темпер. бут и ам афраид ыоу аре гивинг ит а турн ухицх тхат
      гентлеман дид бы но меанс интенд; фор хе уоулд цертаинлы тхинк
      беттер оф ме, иф ундер суцх а цирцумстанце и уере то гиве а флат
      дениал, анд риде офф ас фаст ас и цоулд.”

      “уоулд мр. дарцы тхен цонсидер тхе расхнесс оф ыоур оригинал
      интентионс ас атонед фор бы ыоур обстинацы ин адхеринг то ит?”

      “упон мы уорд, и цаннот ексацтлы експлаин тхе маттер; дарцы муст
      спеак фор химселф.”

      “ыоу експецт ме то аццоунт фор опинионс ухицх ыоу цхоосе то цалл
      мине, бут ухицх и хаве невер ацкноуледгед. аллоуинг тхе цасе,
      хоуевер, то станд аццординг то ыоур репресентатион, ыоу муст
      ремембер, мисс беннет, тхат тхе фриенд ухо ис суппосед то десире
      хис ретурн то тхе хоусе, анд тхе делаы оф хис план, хас мерелы
      десиред ит, аскед ит уитхоут офферинг оне аргумент ин фавоур оф
      итс проприеты.”

      “то ыиелд реадилы—еасилы—то тхе _персуасион_ оф а фриенд ис но
      мерит уитх ыоу.”

      “то ыиелд уитхоут цонвицтион ис но цомплимент то тхе
      ундерстандинг оф еитхер.”

      “ыоу аппеар то ме, мр. дарцы, то аллоу нотхинг фор тхе инфлуенце
      оф фриендсхип анд аффецтион. а регард фор тхе рекууестер уоулд
      офтен маке оне реадилы ыиелд то а рекууест, уитхоут уаитинг фор
      аргументс то реасон оне инто ит. и ам нот партицуларлы спеакинг
      оф суцх а цасе ас ыоу хаве суппосед абоут мр. бинглеы. уе маы ас
      уелл уаит, перхапс, тилл тхе цирцумстанце оццурс бефоре уе
      дисцусс тхе дисцретион оф хис бехавиоур тхереупон. бут ин генерал
      анд ординары цасес бетуеен фриенд анд фриенд, ухере оне оф тхем
      ис десиред бы тхе отхер то цханге а ресолутион оф но веры греат
      момент, схоулд ыоу тхинк илл оф тхат персон фор цомплыинг уитх
      тхе десире, уитхоут уаитинг то бе аргуед инто ит?”

      “уилл ит нот бе адвисабле, бефоре уе процеед он тхис субжецт, то
      арранге уитх ратхер море прецисион тхе дегрее оф импортанце ухицх
      ис то аппертаин то тхис рекууест, ас уелл ас тхе дегрее оф
      интимацы субсистинг бетуеен тхе партиес?”

      “бы алл меанс,” цриед бинглеы; “лет ус хеар алл тхе партицуларс,
      нот форгеттинг тхеир цомпаративе хеигхт анд сизе; фор тхат уилл
      хаве море уеигхт ин тхе аргумент, мисс беннет, тхан ыоу маы бе
      ауаре оф. и ассуре ыоу, тхат иф дарцы уере нот суцх а греат талл
      феллоу, ин цомпарисон уитх мыселф, и схоулд нот паы хим халф со
      муцх деференце. и децларе и до нот кноу а море ауфул обжецт тхан
      дарцы, он партицулар оццасионс, анд ин партицулар плацес; ат хис
      оун хоусе еспециаллы, анд оф а сундаы евенинг, ухен хе хас
      нотхинг то до.”

      мр. дарцы смилед; бут елизабетх тхоугхт схе цоулд перцеиве тхат
      хе уас ратхер оффендед, анд тхерефоре цхецкед хер лаугх. мисс
      бинглеы уармлы ресентед тхе индигниты хе хад рецеивед, ин ан
      експостулатион уитх хер бротхер фор талкинг суцх нонсенсе.

      “и сее ыоур десигн, бинглеы,” саид хис фриенд. “ыоу дислике ан
      аргумент, анд уант то силенце тхис.”

      “перхапс и до. аргументс аре тоо муцх лике диспутес. иф ыоу анд
      мисс беннет уилл дефер ыоурс тилл и ам оут оф тхе роом, и схалл
      бе веры тханкфул; анд тхен ыоу маы саы ухатевер ыоу лике оф ме.”

      “ухат ыоу аск,” саид елизабетх, “ис но сацрифице он мы сиде; анд
      мр. дарцы хад муцх беттер финисх хис леттер.”

      мр. дарцы тоок хер адвице, анд дид финисх хис леттер.

      ухен тхат бусинесс уас овер, хе апплиед то мисс бинглеы анд
      елизабетх фор ан индулгенце оф соме мусиц. мисс бинглеы мовед
      уитх соме алацриты то тхе пианофорте; анд, афтер а полите рекууест
      тхат елизабетх уоулд леад тхе уаы ухицх тхе отхер ас полителы анд
      море еарнестлы негативед, схе сеатед херселф.

      мрс. хурст санг уитх хер систер, анд ухиле тхеы уере тхус
      емплоыед, елизабетх цоулд нот хелп обсервинг, ас схе турнед овер
      соме мусиц-боокс тхат лаы он тхе инструмент, хоу фрекууентлы мр.
      дарцы’с еыес уере фиксед он хер. схе хардлы кнеу хоу то суппосе
      тхат схе цоулд бе ан обжецт оф адмиратион то со греат а ман; анд
      ыет тхат хе схоулд лоок ат хер бецаусе хе дисликед хер, уас стилл
      море странге. схе цоулд онлы имагине, хоуевер, ат ласт тхат схе
      дреу хис нотице бецаусе тхере уас сометхинг море уронг анд
      репрехенсибле, аццординг то хис идеас оф ригхт, тхан ин аны отхер
      персон пресент. тхе суппоситион дид нот паин хер. схе ликед хим
      тоо литтле то царе фор хис аппробатион.

      афтер плаыинг соме италиан сонгс, мисс бинглеы вариед тхе цхарм
      бы а ливелы сцотцх аир; анд соон афтеруардс мр. дарцы, драуинг
      неар елизабетх, саид то хер:

      “до нот ыоу феел а греат инцлинатион, мисс беннет, то сеизе суцх
      ан оппортуниты оф данцинг а реел?”

      схе смилед, бут маде но ансуер. хе репеатед тхе кууестион, уитх
      соме сурприсе ат хер силенце.

      “ох!” саид схе, “и хеард ыоу бефоре, бут и цоулд нот иммедиателы
      детермине ухат то саы ин реплы. ыоу уантед ме, и кноу, то саы
      ‘ыес,’ тхат ыоу мигхт хаве тхе плеасуре оф десписинг мы тасте;
      бут и алуаыс делигхт ин овертхроуинг тхосе кинд оф сцхемес, анд
      цхеатинг а персон оф тхеир премедитатед цонтемпт. и хаве,
      тхерефоре, маде уп мы минд то телл ыоу, тхат и до нот уант то
      данце а реел ат алл—анд ноу десписе ме иф ыоу даре.”

      “индеед и до нот даре.”

      елизабетх, хавинг ратхер експецтед то аффронт хим, уас амазед ат
      хис галлантры; бут тхере уас а микстуре оф суеетнесс анд арцхнесс
      ин хер маннер ухицх маде ит диффицулт фор хер то аффронт аныбоды;
      анд дарцы хад невер беен со беуитцхед бы аны уоман ас хе уас бы
      хер. хе реаллы белиевед, тхат уере ит нот фор тхе инфериориты оф
      хер цоннецтионс, хе схоулд бе ин соме дангер.

      мисс бинглеы сау, ор суспецтед еноугх то бе жеалоус; анд хер
      греат анксиеты фор тхе рецоверы оф хер деар фриенд жане рецеивед
      соме ассистанце фром хер десире оф геттинг рид оф елизабетх.

      схе офтен триед то провоке дарцы инто дисликинг хер гуест, бы
      талкинг оф тхеир суппосед марриаге, анд планнинг хис хаппинесс ин
      суцх ан аллианце.

      “и хопе,” саид схе, ас тхеы уере уалкинг тогетхер ин тхе
      схрубберы тхе некст даы, “ыоу уилл гиве ыоур мотхер-ин-лау а феу
      хинтс, ухен тхис десирабле евент такес плаце, ас то тхе адвантаге
      оф холдинг хер тонгуе; анд иф ыоу цан цомпасс ит, до цуре тхе
      ыоунгер гирлс оф руннинг афтер оффицерс. анд, иф и маы ментион со
      делицате а субжецт, ендеавоур то цхецк тхат литтле сометхинг,
      бордеринг он цонцеит анд импертиненце, ухицх ыоур лады
      поссессес.”

      “хаве ыоу анытхинг елсе то пропосе фор мы доместиц фелициты?”

      “ох! ыес. до лет тхе портраитс оф ыоур унцле анд аунт пхиллипс бе
      плацед ин тхе галлеры ат пемберлеы. пут тхем некст то ыоур
      греат-унцле тхе жудге. тхеы аре ин тхе саме профессион, ыоу кноу,
      онлы ин дифферент линес. ас фор ыоур елизабетх’с пицтуре, ыоу
      муст нот хаве ит такен, фор ухат паинтер цоулд до жустице то
      тхосе беаутифул еыес?”

      “ит уоулд нот бе еасы, индеед, то цатцх тхеир експрессион, бут
      тхеир цолоур анд схапе, анд тхе еыеласхес, со ремаркаблы фине,
      мигхт бе цопиед.”

      ат тхат момент тхеы уере мет фром анотхер уалк бы мрс. хурст анд
      елизабетх херселф.

      “и дид нот кноу тхат ыоу интендед то уалк,” саид мисс бинглеы, ин
      соме цонфусион, лест тхеы хад беен оверхеард.

      “ыоу усед ус абоминаблы илл,” ансуеред мрс. хурст, “руннинг ауаы
      уитхоут теллинг ус тхат ыоу уере цоминг оут.”

      тхен такинг тхе дисенгагед арм оф мр. дарцы, схе лефт елизабетх
      то уалк бы херселф. тхе патх жуст адмиттед тхрее. мр. дарцы фелт
      тхеир руденесс, анд иммедиателы саид:

      “тхис уалк ис нот уиде еноугх фор оур парты. уе хад беттер го
      инто тхе авенуе.”

      бут елизабетх, ухо хад нот тхе леаст инцлинатион то ремаин уитх
      тхем, лаугхинглы ансуеред:

      “но, но; стаы ухере ыоу аре. ыоу аре цхарминглы гроупед, анд
      аппеар то унцоммон адвантаге. тхе пицтурескууе уоулд бе споилт бы
      адмиттинг а фоуртх. гоод-бые.”

      схе тхен ран гаилы офф, режоицинг ас схе рамблед абоут, ин тхе
      хопе оф беинг ат хоме агаин ин а даы ор туо. жане уас алреады со
      муцх рецоверед ас то интенд леавинг хер роом фор а цоупле оф
      хоурс тхат евенинг.




      цхаптер 11

      ухен тхе ладиес ремовед афтер диннер, елизабетх ран уп то хер
      систер, анд сееинг хер уелл гуардед фром цолд, аттендед хер инто
      тхе драуинг-роом, ухере схе уас уелцомед бы хер туо фриендс уитх
      маны профессионс оф плеасуре; анд елизабетх хад невер сеен тхем
      со агрееабле ас тхеы уере дуринг тхе хоур ухицх пассед бефоре тхе
      гентлемен аппеаред. тхеир поуерс оф цонверсатион уере
      цонсидерабле. тхеы цоулд десцрибе ан ентертаинмент уитх аццурацы,
      релате ан анецдоте уитх хумоур, анд лаугх ат тхеир ацкууаинтанце
      уитх спирит.

      бут ухен тхе гентлемен ентеред, жане уас но лонгер тхе фирст
      обжецт; мисс бинглеы’с еыес уере инстантлы турнед тоуард дарцы,
      анд схе хад сометхинг то саы то хим бефоре хе хад адванцед маны
      степс. хе аддрессед химселф то мисс беннет, уитх а полите
      цонгратулатион; мр. хурст алсо маде хер а слигхт боу, анд саид хе
      уас “веры глад;” бут диффусенесс анд уармтх ремаинед фор
      бинглеы’с салутатион. хе уас фулл оф жоы анд аттентион. тхе фирст
      халф-хоур уас спент ин пилинг уп тхе фире, лест схе схоулд суффер
      фром тхе цханге оф роом; анд схе ремовед ат хис десире то тхе
      отхер сиде оф тхе фиреплаце, тхат схе мигхт бе фуртхер фром тхе
      доор. хе тхен сат доун бы хер, анд талкед сцарцелы то аныоне
      елсе. елизабетх, ат уорк ин тхе оппосите цорнер, сау ит алл уитх
      греат делигхт.

      ухен теа уас овер, мр. хурст реминдед хис систер-ин-лау оф тхе
      цард-табле—бут ин ваин. схе хад обтаинед привате интеллигенце
      тхат мр. дарцы дид нот уисх фор цардс; анд мр. хурст соон фоунд
      евен хис опен петитион режецтед. схе ассуред хим тхат но оне
      интендед то плаы, анд тхе силенце оф тхе ухоле парты он тхе
      субжецт сеемед то жустифы хер. мр. хурст хад тхерефоре нотхинг то
      до, бут то стретцх химселф он оне оф тхе софас анд го то слееп.
      дарцы тоок уп а боок; мисс бинглеы дид тхе саме; анд мрс. хурст,
      принципаллы оццупиед ин плаыинг уитх хер брацелетс анд рингс,
      жоинед ноу анд тхен ин хер бротхер’с цонверсатион уитх мисс
      беннет.

      мисс бинглеы’с аттентион уас кууите ас муцх енгагед ин уатцхинг
      мр. дарцы’с прогресс тхроугх _хис_ боок, ас ин реадинг хер оун;
      анд схе уас перпетуаллы еитхер макинг соме инкууиры, ор лоокинг ат
      хис паге. схе цоулд нот уин хим, хоуевер, то аны цонверсатион; хе
      мерелы ансуеред хер кууестион, анд реад он. ат ленгтх, кууите
      ексхаустед бы тхе аттемпт то бе амусед уитх хер оун боок, ухицх
      схе хад онлы цхосен бецаусе ит уас тхе сецонд волуме оф хис, схе
      гаве а греат ыаун анд саид, “хоу плеасант ит ис то спенд ан
      евенинг ин тхис уаы! и децларе афтер алл тхере ис но енжоымент
      лике реадинг! хоу муцх соонер оне тирес оф анытхинг тхан оф а
      боок! ухен и хаве а хоусе оф мы оун, и схалл бе мисерабле иф и
      хаве нот ан ексцеллент либрары.”

      но оне маде аны реплы. схе тхен ыаунед агаин, тхреу асиде хер
      боок, анд цаст хер еыес роунд тхе роом ин кууест фор соме
      амусемент; ухен хеаринг хер бротхер ментионинг а балл то мисс
      беннет, схе турнед судденлы тоуардс хим анд саид:

      “бы тхе бые, цхарлес, аре ыоу реаллы сериоус ин медитатинг а
      данце ат нетхерфиелд? и уоулд адвисе ыоу, бефоре ыоу детермине он
      ит, то цонсулт тхе уисхес оф тхе пресент парты; и ам муцх
      мистакен иф тхере аре нот соме амонг ус то ухом а балл уоулд бе
      ратхер а пунисхмент тхан а плеасуре.”

      “иф ыоу меан дарцы,” цриед хер бротхер, “хе маы го то бед, иф хе
      цхоосес, бефоре ит бегинс—бут ас фор тхе балл, ит ис кууите а
      сеттлед тхинг; анд ас соон ас ницхоллс хас маде ухите соуп
      еноугх, и схалл сенд роунд мы цардс.”

      “и схоулд лике баллс инфинителы беттер,” схе реплиед, “иф тхеы
      уере царриед он ин а дифферент маннер; бут тхере ис сометхинг
      инсуффераблы тедиоус ин тхе усуал процесс оф суцх а меетинг. ит
      уоулд сурелы бе муцх море ратионал иф цонверсатион инстеад оф
      данцинг уере маде тхе ордер оф тхе даы.”

      “муцх море ратионал, мы деар царолине, и даре саы, бут ит уоулд
      нот бе неар со муцх лике а балл.”

      мисс бинглеы маде но ансуер, анд соон афтеруардс схе гот уп анд
      уалкед абоут тхе роом. хер фигуре уас елегант, анд схе уалкед
      уелл; бут дарцы, ат ухом ит уас алл аимед, уас стилл инфлексиблы
      студиоус. ин тхе десператион оф хер феелингс, схе ресолвед он оне
      еффорт море, анд, турнинг то елизабетх, саид:

      “мисс елиза беннет, лет ме персуаде ыоу то фоллоу мы ексампле, анд
      таке а турн абоут тхе роом. и ассуре ыоу ит ис веры рефресхинг
      афтер ситтинг со лонг ин оне аттитуде.”

      елизабетх уас сурприсед, бут агреед то ит иммедиателы. мисс
      бинглеы суццеедед но лесс ин тхе реал обжецт оф хер цивилиты; мр.
      дарцы лоокед уп. хе уас ас муцх ауаке то тхе новелты оф аттентион
      ин тхат кууартер ас елизабетх херселф цоулд бе, анд унцонсциоуслы
      цлосед хис боок. хе уас дирецтлы инвитед то жоин тхеир парты, бут
      хе децлинед ит, обсервинг тхат хе цоулд имагине бут туо мотивес
      фор тхеир цхоосинг то уалк уп анд доун тхе роом тогетхер, уитх
      еитхер оф ухицх мотивес хис жоининг тхем уоулд интерфере. “ухат
      цоулд хе меан? схе уас дыинг то кноу ухат цоулд бе хис
      меанинг?”—анд аскед елизабетх ухетхер схе цоулд ат алл ундерстанд
      хим?

      “нот ат алл,” уас хер ансуер; “бут депенд упон ит, хе меанс то бе
      севере он ус, анд оур сурест уаы оф дисаппоинтинг хим уилл бе то
      аск нотхинг абоут ит.”

      мисс бинглеы, хоуевер, уас инцапабле оф дисаппоинтинг мр. дарцы
      ин анытхинг, анд персеверед тхерефоре ин рекууиринг ан експланатион
      оф хис туо мотивес.

      “и хаве нот тхе смаллест обжецтион то експлаининг тхем,” саид хе,
      ас соон ас схе аллоуед хим то спеак. “ыоу еитхер цхоосе тхис
      метход оф пассинг тхе евенинг бецаусе ыоу аре ин еацх отхер’с
      цонфиденце, анд хаве сецрет аффаирс то дисцусс, ор бецаусе ыоу
      аре цонсциоус тхат ыоур фигурес аппеар то тхе греатест адвантаге
      ин уалкинг; иф тхе фирст, и уоулд бе цомплетелы ин ыоур уаы, анд
      иф тхе сецонд, и цан адмире ыоу муцх беттер ас и сит бы тхе
      фире.”

      “ох! схоцкинг!” цриед мисс бинглеы. “и невер хеард анытхинг со
      абоминабле. хоу схалл уе пунисх хим фор суцх а спеецх?”

      “нотхинг со еасы, иф ыоу хаве бут тхе инцлинатион,” саид
      елизабетх. “уе цан алл плагуе анд пунисх оне анотхер. теасе
      хим—лаугх ат хим. интимате ас ыоу аре, ыоу муст кноу хоу ит ис то
      бе доне.”

      “бут упон мы хоноур, и до _нот_. и до ассуре ыоу тхат мы интимацы
      хас нот ыет таугхт ме _тхат_. теасе цалмнесс оф маннер анд
      пресенце оф минд! но, но; и феел хе маы дефы ус тхере. анд ас то
      лаугхтер, уе уилл нот експосе оурселвес, иф ыоу плеасе, бы
      аттемптинг то лаугх уитхоут а субжецт. мр. дарцы маы хуг
      химселф.”

      “мр. дарцы ис нот то бе лаугхед ат!” цриед елизабетх. “тхат ис ан
      унцоммон адвантаге, анд унцоммон и хопе ит уилл цонтинуе, фор ит
      уоулд бе а греат лосс то _ме_ то хаве маны суцх ацкууаинтанцес. и
      деарлы лове а лаугх.”

      “мисс бинглеы,” саид хе, “хас гивен ме море цредит тхан цан бе.
      тхе уисест анд тхе бест оф мен—наы, тхе уисест анд бест оф тхеир
      ацтионс—маы бе рендеред ридицулоус бы а персон ухосе фирст обжецт
      ин лифе ис а жоке.”

      “цертаинлы,” реплиед елизабетх—“тхере аре суцх пеопле, бут и хопе
      и ам нот оне оф _тхем_. и хопе и невер ридицуле ухат ис уисе анд
      гоод. фоллиес анд нонсенсе, ухимс анд инцонсистенциес, _до_
      диверт ме, и оун, анд и лаугх ат тхем ухеневер и цан. бут тхесе,
      и суппосе, аре прециселы ухат ыоу аре уитхоут.”

      “перхапс тхат ис нот поссибле фор аныоне. бут ит хас беен тхе
      студы оф мы лифе то авоид тхосе уеакнессес ухицх офтен експосе а
      стронг ундерстандинг то ридицуле.”

      “суцх ас ваниты анд приде.”

      “ыес, ваниты ис а уеакнесс индеед. бут приде—ухере тхере ис а
      реал супериориты оф минд, приде уилл бе алуаыс ундер гоод
      регулатион.”

      елизабетх турнед ауаы то хиде а смиле.

      “ыоур ексаминатион оф мр. дарцы ис овер, и пресуме,” саид мисс
      бинглеы; “анд праы ухат ис тхе ресулт?”

      “и ам перфецтлы цонвинцед бы ит тхат мр. дарцы хас но дефецт. хе
      оунс ит химселф уитхоут дисгуисе.”

      “но,” саид дарцы, “и хаве маде но суцх претенсион. и хаве фаултс
      еноугх, бут тхеы аре нот, и хопе, оф ундерстандинг. мы темпер и
      даре нот воуцх фор. ит ис, и белиеве, тоо литтле
      ыиелдинг—цертаинлы тоо литтле фор тхе цонвениенце оф тхе уорлд. и
      цаннот форгет тхе фоллиес анд вицес оф отхерс со соон ас и оугхт,
      нор тхеир оффенсес агаинст мыселф. мы феелингс аре нот пуффед
      абоут уитх еверы аттемпт то мове тхем. мы темпер уоулд перхапс бе
      цаллед ресентфул. мы гоод опинион онце лост, ис лост форевер.”

      “_тхат_ ис а фаилинг индеед!” цриед елизабетх. “имплацабле
      ресентмент _ис_ а схаде ин а цхарацтер. бут ыоу хаве цхосен ыоур
      фаулт уелл. и реаллы цаннот _лаугх_ ат ит. ыоу аре сафе фром ме.”

      “тхере ис, и белиеве, ин еверы диспоситион а тенденцы то соме
      партицулар евил—а натурал дефецт, ухицх нот евен тхе бест
      едуцатион цан оверцоме.”

      “анд _ыоур_ дефецт ис то хате еверыбоды.”

      “анд ыоурс,” хе реплиед уитх а смиле, “ис уиллфуллы то
      мисундерстанд тхем.”

      “до лет ус хаве а литтле мусиц,” цриед мисс бинглеы, тиред оф а
      цонверсатион ин ухицх схе хад но схаре. “лоуиса, ыоу уилл нот
      минд мы уакинг мр. хурст?”

      хер систер хад нот тхе смаллест обжецтион, анд тхе пианофорте уас
      опенед; анд дарцы, афтер а феу моментс’ рецоллецтион, уас нот
      сорры фор ит. хе беган то феел тхе дангер оф паыинг елизабетх тоо
      муцх аттентион.




      цхаптер 12

      ин цонсекууенце оф ан агреемент бетуеен тхе систерс, елизабетх
      уроте тхе некст морнинг то тхеир мотхер, то бег тхат тхе царриаге
      мигхт бе сент фор тхем ин тхе цоурсе оф тхе даы. бут мрс. беннет,
      ухо хад цалцулатед он хер даугхтерс ремаининг ат нетхерфиелд тилл
      тхе фоллоуинг туесдаы, ухицх уоулд ексацтлы финисх жане’с уеек,
      цоулд нот бринг херселф то рецеиве тхем уитх плеасуре бефоре. хер
      ансуер, тхерефоре, уас нот пропитиоус, ат леаст нот то
      елизабетх’с уисхес, фор схе уас импатиент то гет хоме. мрс.
      беннет сент тхем уорд тхат тхеы цоулд нот поссиблы хаве тхе
      царриаге бефоре туесдаы; анд ин хер постсцрипт ит уас аддед, тхат
      иф мр. бинглеы анд хис систер прессед тхем то стаы лонгер, схе
      цоулд спаре тхем веры уелл. агаинст стаыинг лонгер, хоуевер,
      елизабетх уас поситивелы ресолвед—нор дид схе муцх експецт ит
      уоулд бе аскед; анд феарфул, он тхе цонтрары, ас беинг цонсидеред
      ас интрудинг тхемселвес неедлесслы лонг, схе ургед жане то борроу
      мр. бинглеы’с царриаге иммедиателы, анд ат ленгтх ит уас сеттлед
      тхат тхеир оригинал десигн оф леавинг нетхерфиелд тхат морнинг
      схоулд бе ментионед, анд тхе рекууест маде.

      тхе цоммуницатион ексцитед маны профессионс оф цонцерн; анд еноугх
      уас саид оф уисхинг тхем то стаы ат леаст тилл тхе фоллоуинг даы
      то уорк он жане; анд тилл тхе морроу тхеир гоинг уас деферред.
      мисс бинглеы уас тхен сорры тхат схе хад пропосед тхе делаы, фор
      хер жеалоусы анд дислике оф оне систер муцх ексцеедед хер
      аффецтион фор тхе отхер.

      тхе мастер оф тхе хоусе хеард уитх реал сорроу тхат тхеы уере то
      го со соон, анд репеатедлы триед то персуаде мисс беннет тхат ит
      уоулд нот бе сафе фор хер—тхат схе уас нот еноугх рецоверед; бут
      жане уас фирм ухере схе фелт херселф то бе ригхт.

      то мр. дарцы ит уас уелцоме интеллигенце—елизабетх хад беен ат
      нетхерфиелд лонг еноугх. схе аттрацтед хим море тхан хе ликед—анд
      мисс бинглеы уас унцивил то _хер_, анд море теасинг тхан усуал то
      химселф. хе уиселы ресолвед то бе партицуларлы царефул тхат но
      сигн оф адмиратион схоулд _ноу_ есцапе хим, нотхинг тхат цоулд
      елевате хер уитх тхе хопе оф инфлуенцинг хис фелициты; сенсибле
      тхат иф суцх ан идеа хад беен суггестед, хис бехавиоур дуринг тхе
      ласт даы муст хаве материал уеигхт ин цонфирминг ор црусхинг ит.
      стеады то хис пурпосе, хе сцарцелы споке тен уордс то хер тхроугх
      тхе ухоле оф сатурдаы, анд тхоугх тхеы уере ат оне тиме лефт бы
      тхемселвес фор халф-ан-хоур, хе адхеред мост цонсциентиоуслы то
      хис боок, анд уоулд нот евен лоок ат хер.

      он сундаы, афтер морнинг сервице, тхе сепаратион, со агрееабле то
      алмост алл, тоок плаце. мисс бинглеы’с цивилиты то елизабетх
      инцреасед ат ласт веры рапидлы, ас уелл ас хер аффецтион фор
      жане; анд ухен тхеы партед, афтер ассуринг тхе латтер оф тхе
      плеасуре ит уоулд алуаыс гиве хер то сее хер еитхер ат лонгбоурн
      ор нетхерфиелд, анд ембрацинг хер мост тендерлы, схе евен схоок
      хандс уитх тхе формер. елизабетх тоок леаве оф тхе ухоле парты ин
      тхе ливелиест оф спиритс.

      тхеы уере нот уелцомед хоме веры цордиаллы бы тхеир мотхер. мрс.
      беннет уондеред ат тхеир цоминг, анд тхоугхт тхем веры уронг то
      гиве со муцх троубле, анд уас суре жане уоулд хаве цаугхт цолд
      агаин. бут тхеир фатхер, тхоугх веры лацониц ин хис експрессионс
      оф плеасуре, уас реаллы глад то сее тхем; хе хад фелт тхеир
      импортанце ин тхе фамилы цирцле. тхе евенинг цонверсатион, ухен
      тхеы уере алл ассемблед, хад лост муцх оф итс аниматион, анд
      алмост алл итс сенсе бы тхе абсенце оф жане анд елизабетх.

      тхеы фоунд мары, ас усуал, дееп ин тхе студы оф тхороугх-басс анд
      хуман натуре; анд хад соме екстрацтс то адмире, анд соме неу
      обсерватионс оф тхреадбаре моралиты то листен то. цатхерине анд
      лыдиа хад информатион фор тхем оф а дифферент сорт. муцх хад беен
      доне анд муцх хад беен саид ин тхе регимент синце тхе прецединг
      уеднесдаы; северал оф тхе оффицерс хад динед лателы уитх тхеир
      унцле, а привате хад беен флоггед, анд ит хад ацтуаллы беен
      хинтед тхат цолонел форстер уас гоинг то бе марриед.




      цхаптер 13

      “и хопе, мы деар,” саид мр. беннет то хис уифе, ас тхеы уере ат
      бреакфаст тхе некст морнинг, “тхат ыоу хаве ордеред а гоод диннер
      то-даы, бецаусе и хаве реасон то експецт ан аддитион то оур фамилы
      парты.”

      “ухо до ыоу меан, мы деар? и кноу оф нободы тхат ис цоминг, и ам
      суре, унлесс цхарлотте луцас схоулд хаппен то цалл ин—анд и хопе
      _мы_ диннерс аре гоод еноугх фор хер. и до нот белиеве схе офтен
      сеес суцх ат хоме.”

      “тхе персон оф ухом и спеак ис а гентлеман, анд а странгер.”

      мрс. беннет’с еыес спарклед. “а гентлеман анд а странгер! ит ис
      мр. бинглеы, и ам суре! уелл, и ам суре и схалл бе екстремелы глад
      то сее мр. бинглеы. бут—гоод лорд! хоу унлуцкы! тхере ис нот а
      бит оф фисх то бе гот то-даы. лыдиа, мы лове, ринг тхе белл—и
      муст спеак то хилл тхис момент.”

      “ит ис _нот_ мр. бинглеы,” саид хер хусбанд; “ит ис а персон ухом
      и невер сау ин тхе ухоле цоурсе оф мы лифе.”

      тхис роусед а генерал астонисхмент; анд хе хад тхе плеасуре оф
      беинг еагерлы кууестионед бы хис уифе анд хис фиве даугхтерс ат
      онце.

      афтер амусинг химселф соме тиме уитх тхеир цуриоситы, хе тхус
      експлаинед:

      “абоут а монтх аго и рецеивед тхис леттер; анд абоут а фортнигхт
      аго и ансуеред ит, фор и тхоугхт ит а цасе оф соме делицацы, анд
      рекууиринг еарлы аттентион. ит ис фром мы цоусин, мр. цоллинс,
      ухо, ухен и ам деад, маы турн ыоу алл оут оф тхис хоусе ас соон
      ас хе плеасес.”

      “ох! мы деар,” цриед хис уифе, “и цаннот беар то хеар тхат
      ментионед. праы до нот талк оф тхат одиоус ман. и до тхинк ит ис
      тхе хардест тхинг ин тхе уорлд, тхат ыоур естате схоулд бе
      ентаилед ауаы фром ыоур оун цхилдрен; анд и ам суре, иф и хад
      беен ыоу, и схоулд хаве триед лонг аго то до сометхинг ор отхер
      абоут ит.”

      жане анд елизабетх триед то експлаин то хер тхе натуре оф ан
      ентаил. тхеы хад офтен аттемптед то до ит бефоре, бут ит уас а
      субжецт он ухицх мрс. беннет уас беыонд тхе реацх оф реасон, анд
      схе цонтинуед то раил биттерлы агаинст тхе цруелты оф сеттлинг ан
      естате ауаы фром а фамилы оф фиве даугхтерс, ин фавоур оф а ман
      ухом нободы царед анытхинг абоут.

      “ит цертаинлы ис а мост иникууитоус аффаир,” саид мр. беннет, “анд
      нотхинг цан цлеар мр. цоллинс фром тхе гуилт оф инхеритинг
      лонгбоурн. бут иф ыоу уилл листен то хис леттер, ыоу маы перхапс
      бе а литтле софтенед бы хис маннер оф експрессинг химселф.”

      “но, тхат и ам суре и схалл нот; анд и тхинк ит ис веры
      импертинент оф хим то урите то ыоу ат алл, анд веры хыпоцритицал.
      и хате суцх фалсе фриендс. ухы цоулд хе нот кееп он кууаррелинг
      уитх ыоу, ас хис фатхер дид бефоре хим?”

      “ухы, индеед; хе доес сеем то хаве хад соме филиал сцруплес он
      тхат хеад, ас ыоу уилл хеар.”

      “хунсфорд, неар уестерхам, кент, 15_тх оцтобер_.

      “деар сир,—
      “тхе дисагреемент субсистинг бетуеен ыоурселф анд мы лате
      хоноуред фатхер алуаыс гаве ме муцх унеасинесс, анд синце и хаве
      хад тхе мисфортуне то лосе хим, и хаве фрекууентлы уисхед то хеал
      тхе бреацх; бут фор соме тиме и уас кепт бацк бы мы оун доубтс,
      феаринг лест ит мигхт сеем дисреспецтфул то хис меморы фор ме то
      бе он гоод термс уитх аныоне уитх ухом ит хад алуаыс плеасед хим
      то бе ат варианце.—‘тхере, мрс. беннет.’—мы минд, хоуевер, ис ноу
      маде уп он тхе субжецт, фор хавинг рецеивед ординатион ат еастер,
      и хаве беен со фортунате ас то бе дистингуисхед бы тхе патронаге
      оф тхе ригхт хоноурабле лады цатхерине де боургх, уидоу оф сир
      леуис де боургх, ухосе боунты анд бенефиценце хас преферред ме то
      тхе валуабле рецторы оф тхис парисх, ухере ит схалл бе мы еарнест
      ендеавоур то демеан мыселф уитх гратефул респецт тоуардс хер
      ладысхип, анд бе евер реады то перформ тхосе ритес анд церемониес
      ухицх аре институтед бы тхе цхурцх оф енгланд. ас а цлергыман,
      мореовер, и феел ит мы дуты то промоте анд естаблисх тхе блессинг
      оф пеаце ин алл фамилиес уитхин тхе реацх оф мы инфлуенце; анд он
      тхесе гроундс и флаттер мыселф тхат мы пресент овертурес аре
      хигхлы цоммендабле, анд тхат тхе цирцумстанце оф мы беинг некст ин
      тхе ентаил оф лонгбоурн естате уилл бе киндлы оверлоокед он ыоур
      сиде, анд нот леад ыоу то режецт тхе офферед оливе-бранцх. и
      цаннот бе отхеруисе тхан цонцернед ат беинг тхе меанс оф инжуринг
      ыоур амиабле даугхтерс, анд бег леаве то апологисе фор ит, ас
      уелл ас то ассуре ыоу оф мы реадинесс то маке тхем еверы поссибле
      амендс—бут оф тхис хереафтер. иф ыоу схоулд хаве но обжецтион то
      рецеиве ме инто ыоур хоусе, и пропосе мыселф тхе сатисфацтион оф
      уаитинг он ыоу анд ыоур фамилы, мондаы, новембер 18тх, бы фоур
      о’цлоцк, анд схалл пробаблы треспасс он ыоур хоспиталиты тилл тхе
      сатурдаы се’еннигхт фоллоуинг, ухицх и цан до уитхоут аны
      инцонвениенце, ас лады цатхерине ис фар фром обжецтинг то мы
      оццасионал абсенце он а сундаы, провидед тхат соме отхер
      цлергыман ис енгагед то до тхе дуты оф тхе даы.—и ремаин, деар
      сир, уитх респецтфул цомплиментс то ыоур лады анд даугхтерс, ыоур
      уелл-уисхер анд фриенд,

      “уиллиам цоллинс”

      “ат фоур о’цлоцк, тхерефоре, уе маы експецт тхис пеаце-макинг
      гентлеман,” саид мр. беннет, ас хе фолдед уп тхе леттер. “хе
      сеемс то бе а мост цонсциентиоус анд полите ыоунг ман, упон мы
      уорд, анд и доубт нот уилл прове а валуабле ацкууаинтанце,
      еспециаллы иф лады цатхерине схоулд бе со индулгент ас то лет хим
      цоме то ус агаин.”

      “тхере ис соме сенсе ин ухат хе саыс абоут тхе гирлс, хоуевер,
      анд иф хе ис диспосед то маке тхем аны амендс, и схалл нот бе тхе
      персон то дисцоураге хим.”

      “тхоугх ит ис диффицулт,” саид жане, “то гуесс ин ухат уаы хе цан
      меан то маке ус тхе атонемент хе тхинкс оур дуе, тхе уисх ис
      цертаинлы то хис цредит.”

      елизабетх уас цхиефлы струцк бы хис екстраординары деференце фор
      лады цатхерине, анд хис кинд интентион оф цхристенинг, маррыинг,
      анд бурыинг хис парисхионерс ухеневер ит уере рекууиред.

      “хе муст бе ан оддиты, и тхинк,” саид схе. “и цаннот маке хим
      оут.—тхере ис сометхинг веры помпоус ин хис стыле.—анд ухат цан
      хе меан бы апологисинг фор беинг некст ин тхе ентаил?—уе цаннот
      суппосе хе уоулд хелп ит иф хе цоулд.—цоулд хе бе а сенсибле ман,
      сир?”

      “но, мы деар, и тхинк нот. и хаве греат хопес оф финдинг хим
      кууите тхе реверсе. тхере ис а микстуре оф сервилиты анд
      селф-импортанце ин хис леттер, ухицх промисес уелл. и ам
      импатиент то сее хим.”

      “ин поинт оф цомпоситион,” саид мары, “тхе леттер доес нот сеем
      дефецтиве. тхе идеа оф тхе оливе-бранцх перхапс ис нот ухоллы
      неу, ыет и тхинк ит ис уелл експрессед.”

      то цатхерине анд лыдиа, неитхер тхе леттер нор итс уритер уере ин
      аны дегрее интерестинг. ит уас некст то импоссибле тхат тхеир
      цоусин схоулд цоме ин а сцарлет цоат, анд ит уас ноу соме уеекс
      синце тхеы хад рецеивед плеасуре фром тхе социеты оф а ман ин аны
      отхер цолоур. ас фор тхеир мотхер, мр. цоллинс’с леттер хад доне
      ауаы муцх оф хер илл-уилл, анд схе уас препаринг то сее хим уитх
      а дегрее оф цомпосуре ухицх астонисхед хер хусбанд анд даугхтерс.

      мр. цоллинс уас пунцтуал то хис тиме, анд уас рецеивед уитх греат
      политенесс бы тхе ухоле фамилы. мр. беннет индеед саид литтле;
      бут тхе ладиес уере реады еноугх то талк, анд мр. цоллинс сеемед
      неитхер ин неед оф енцоурагемент, нор инцлинед то бе силент
      химселф. хе уас а талл, хеавы-лоокинг ыоунг ман оф
      фиве-анд-туенты. хис аир уас граве анд стателы, анд хис маннерс
      уере веры формал. хе хад нот беен лонг сеатед бефоре хе
      цомплиментед мрс. беннет он хавинг со фине а фамилы оф даугхтерс;
      саид хе хад хеард муцх оф тхеир беауты, бут тхат ин тхис инстанце
      фаме хад фаллен схорт оф тхе трутх; анд аддед, тхат хе дид нот
      доубт хер сееинг тхем алл ин дуе тиме диспосед оф ин марриаге.
      тхис галлантры уас нот муцх то тхе тасте оф соме оф хис хеарерс;
      бут мрс. беннет, ухо кууаррелед уитх но цомплиментс, ансуеред мост
      реадилы.

      “ыоу аре веры кинд, и ам суре; анд и уисх уитх алл мы хеарт ит
      маы прове со, фор елсе тхеы уилл бе деституте еноугх. тхингс аре
      сеттлед со оддлы.”

      “ыоу аллуде, перхапс, то тхе ентаил оф тхис естате.”

      “ах! сир, и до индеед. ит ис а гриевоус аффаир то мы поор гирлс,
      ыоу муст цонфесс. нот тхат и меан то финд фаулт уитх _ыоу_, фор
      суцх тхингс и кноу аре алл цханце ин тхис уорлд. тхере ис но
      кноуинг хоу естатес уилл го ухен онце тхеы цоме то бе ентаилед.”

      “и ам веры сенсибле, мадам, оф тхе хардсхип то мы фаир цоусинс,
      анд цоулд саы муцх он тхе субжецт, бут тхат и ам цаутиоус оф
      аппеаринг форуард анд преципитате. бут и цан ассуре тхе ыоунг
      ладиес тхат и цоме препаред то адмире тхем. ат пресент и уилл нот
      саы море; бут, перхапс, ухен уе аре беттер ацкууаинтед—”

      хе уас интерруптед бы а суммонс то диннер; анд тхе гирлс смилед
      он еацх отхер. тхеы уере нот тхе онлы обжецтс оф мр. цоллинс’с
      адмиратион. тхе халл, тхе дининг-роом, анд алл итс фурнитуре,
      уере ексаминед анд праисед; анд хис цоммендатион оф еверытхинг
      уоулд хаве тоуцхед мрс. беннет’с хеарт, бут фор тхе мортифыинг
      суппоситион оф хис виеуинг ит алл ас хис оун футуре проперты. тхе
      диннер тоо ин итс турн уас хигхлы адмиред; анд хе беггед то кноу
      то ухицх оф хис фаир цоусинс тхе ексцелленцы оф итс цоокинг уас
      оуинг. бут хе уас сет ригхт тхере бы мрс. беннет, ухо ассуред хим
      уитх соме аспериты тхат тхеы уере веры уелл абле то кееп а гоод
      цоок, анд тхат хер даугхтерс хад нотхинг то до ин тхе китцхен. хе
      беггед пардон фор хавинг дисплеасед хер. ин а софтенед тоне схе
      децларед херселф нот ат алл оффендед; бут хе цонтинуед то
      апологисе фор абоут а кууартер оф ан хоур.




      цхаптер 14

      дуринг диннер, мр. беннет сцарцелы споке ат алл; бут ухен тхе
      сервантс уере уитхдраун, хе тхоугхт ит тиме то хаве соме
      цонверсатион уитх хис гуест, анд тхерефоре стартед а субжецт ин
      ухицх хе експецтед хим то схине, бы обсервинг тхат хе сеемед веры
      фортунате ин хис патронесс. лады цатхерине де боургх’с аттентион
      то хис уисхес, анд цонсидератион фор хис цомфорт, аппеаред веры
      ремаркабле. мр. беннет цоулд нот хаве цхосен беттер. мр. цоллинс
      уас елокууент ин хер праисе. тхе субжецт елеватед хим то море тхан
      усуал солемниты оф маннер, анд уитх а мост импортант аспецт хе
      протестед тхат “хе хад невер ин хис лифе уитнессед суцх бехавиоур
      ин а персон оф ранк—суцх аффабилиты анд цондесценсион, ас хе хад
      химселф експериенцед фром лады цатхерине. схе хад беен грациоуслы
      плеасед то аппрове оф ботх оф тхе дисцоурсес ухицх хе хад алреады
      хад тхе хоноур оф преацхинг бефоре хер. схе хад алсо аскед хим
      туице то дине ат росингс, анд хад сент фор хим онлы тхе сатурдаы
      бефоре, то маке уп хер поол оф кууадрилле ин тхе евенинг. лады
      цатхерине уас рецконед проуд бы маны пеопле хе кнеу, бут _хе_ хад
      невер сеен анытхинг бут аффабилиты ин хер. схе хад алуаыс спокен
      то хим ас схе уоулд то аны отхер гентлеман; схе маде нот тхе
      смаллест обжецтион то хис жоининг ин тхе социеты оф тхе
      неигхбоурхоод нор то хис леавинг тхе парисх оццасионаллы фор а
      уеек ор туо, то висит хис релатионс. схе хад евен цондесцендед то
      адвисе хим то марры ас соон ас хе цоулд, провидед хе цхосе уитх
      дисцретион; анд хад онце паид хим а висит ин хис хумбле
      парсонаге, ухере схе хад перфецтлы аппровед алл тхе алтератионс
      хе хад беен макинг, анд хад евен воуцхсафед то суггест соме
      херселф—соме схелвес ин тхе цлосет уп стаирс.”

      “тхат ис алл веры пропер анд цивил, и ам суре,” саид мрс. беннет,
      “анд и даре саы схе ис а веры агрееабле уоман. ит ис а питы тхат
      греат ладиес ин генерал аре нот море лике хер. доес схе ливе неар
      ыоу, сир?”

      “тхе гарден ин ухицх стандс мы хумбле абоде ис сепаратед онлы бы
      а лане фром росингс парк, хер ладысхип’с ресиденце.”

      “и тхинк ыоу саид схе уас а уидоу, сир? хас схе аны фамилы?”

      “схе хас онлы оне даугхтер, тхе хеиресс оф росингс, анд оф веры
      екстенсиве проперты.”

      “ах!” саид мрс. беннет, схакинг хер хеад, “тхен схе ис беттер офф
      тхан маны гирлс. анд ухат сорт оф ыоунг лады ис схе? ис схе
      хандсоме?”

      “схе ис а мост цхарминг ыоунг лады индеед. лады цатхерине херселф
      саыс тхат, ин поинт оф труе беауты, мисс де боургх ис фар
      супериор то тхе хандсомест оф хер секс, бецаусе тхере ис тхат ин
      хер феатурес ухицх маркс тхе ыоунг лады оф дистингуисхед биртх.
      схе ис унфортунателы оф а сицклы цонститутион, ухицх хас
      превентед хер фром макинг тхат прогресс ин маны аццомплисхментс
      ухицх схе цоулд нот хаве отхеруисе фаилед оф, ас и ам информед бы
      тхе лады ухо суперинтендед хер едуцатион, анд ухо стилл ресидес
      уитх тхем. бут схе ис перфецтлы амиабле, анд офтен цондесцендс то
      дриве бы мы хумбле абоде ин хер литтле пхаетон анд пониес.”

      “хас схе беен пресентед? и до нот ремембер хер наме амонг тхе
      ладиес ат цоурт.”

      “хер индифферент стате оф хеалтх унхаппилы превентс хер беинг ин
      тоун; анд бы тхат меанс, ас и толд лады цатхерине оне даы, хас
      депривед тхе бритисх цоурт оф итс бригхтест орнамент. хер
      ладысхип сеемед плеасед уитх тхе идеа; анд ыоу маы имагине тхат и
      ам хаппы он еверы оццасион то оффер тхосе литтле делицате
      цомплиментс ухицх аре алуаыс аццептабле то ладиес. и хаве море
      тхан онце обсервед то лады цатхерине, тхат хер цхарминг даугхтер
      сеемед борн то бе а дуцхесс, анд тхат тхе мост елеватед ранк,
      инстеад оф гивинг хер цонсекууенце, уоулд бе адорнед бы хер. тхесе
      аре тхе кинд оф литтле тхингс ухицх плеасе хер ладысхип, анд ит
      ис а сорт оф аттентион ухицх и цонцеиве мыселф пецулиарлы боунд
      то паы.”

      “ыоу жудге веры проперлы,” саид мр. беннет, “анд ит ис хаппы фор
      ыоу тхат ыоу поссесс тхе талент оф флаттеринг уитх делицацы. маы
      и аск ухетхер тхесе плеасинг аттентионс процеед фром тхе импулсе
      оф тхе момент, ор аре тхе ресулт оф превиоус студы?”

      “тхеы арисе цхиефлы фром ухат ис пассинг ат тхе тиме, анд тхоугх
      и сометимес амусе мыселф уитх суггестинг анд аррангинг суцх
      литтле елегант цомплиментс ас маы бе адаптед то ординары
      оццасионс, и алуаыс уисх то гиве тхем ас унстудиед ан аир ас
      поссибле.”

      мр. беннет’с експецтатионс уере фуллы ансуеред. хис цоусин уас ас
      абсурд ас хе хад хопед, анд хе листенед то хим уитх тхе кеенест
      енжоымент, маинтаининг ат тхе саме тиме тхе мост ресолуте
      цомпосуре оф цоунтенанце, анд, ексцепт ин ан оццасионал гланце ат
      елизабетх, рекууиринг но партнер ин хис плеасуре.

      бы теа-тиме, хоуевер, тхе досе хад беен еноугх, анд мр. беннет
      уас глад то таке хис гуест инто тхе драуинг-роом агаин, анд, ухен
      теа уас овер, глад то инвите хим то реад алоуд то тхе ладиес. мр.
      цоллинс реадилы ассентед, анд а боок уас продуцед; бут, он
      бехолдинг ит (фор еверытхинг анноунцед ит то бе фром а
      цирцулатинг либрары), хе стартед бацк, анд беггинг пардон,
      протестед тхат хе невер реад новелс. китты старед ат хим, анд
      лыдиа ексцлаимед. отхер боокс уере продуцед, анд афтер соме
      делибератион хе цхосе фордыце’с сермонс. лыдиа гапед ас хе опенед
      тхе волуме, анд бефоре хе хад, уитх веры монотоноус солемниты,
      реад тхрее пагес, схе интерруптед хим уитх:

      “до ыоу кноу, мамма, тхат мы унцле пхиллипс талкс оф турнинг ауаы
      рицхард; анд иф хе доес, цолонел форстер уилл хире хим. мы аунт
      толд ме со херселф он сатурдаы. и схалл уалк то мерытон то-морроу
      то хеар море абоут ит, анд то аск ухен мр. денны цомес бацк фром
      тоун.”

      лыдиа уас бид бы хер туо елдест систерс то холд хер тонгуе; бут
      мр. цоллинс, муцх оффендед, лаид асиде хис боок, анд саид:

      “и хаве офтен обсервед хоу литтле ыоунг ладиес аре интерестед бы
      боокс оф а сериоус стамп, тхоугх уриттен солелы фор тхеир
      бенефит. ит амазес ме, и цонфесс; фор, цертаинлы, тхере цан бе
      нотхинг со адвантагеоус то тхем ас инструцтион. бут и уилл но
      лонгер импортуне мы ыоунг цоусин.”

      тхен турнинг то мр. беннет, хе офферед химселф ас хис антагонист
      ат бацкгаммон. мр. беннет аццептед тхе цхалленге, обсервинг тхат
      хе ацтед веры уиселы ин леавинг тхе гирлс то тхеир оун трифлинг
      амусементс. мрс. беннет анд хер даугхтерс апологисед мост цивиллы
      фор лыдиа’с интерруптион, анд промисед тхат ит схоулд нот оццур
      агаин, иф хе уоулд ресуме хис боок; бут мр. цоллинс, афтер
      ассуринг тхем тхат хе боре хис ыоунг цоусин но илл-уилл, анд
      схоулд невер ресент хер бехавиоур ас аны аффронт, сеатед химселф
      ат анотхер табле уитх мр. беннет, анд препаред фор бацкгаммон.




      цхаптер 15

      мр. цоллинс уас нот а сенсибле ман, анд тхе дефициенцы оф натуре
      хад беен бут литтле ассистед бы едуцатион ор социеты; тхе
      греатест парт оф хис лифе хавинг беен спент ундер тхе гуиданце оф
      ан иллитерате анд мисерлы фатхер; анд тхоугх хе белонгед то оне
      оф тхе университиес, хе хад мерелы кепт тхе нецессары термс,
      уитхоут форминг ат ит аны усефул ацкууаинтанце. тхе субжецтион ин
      ухицх хис фатхер хад броугхт хим уп хад гивен хим оригиналлы
      греат хумилиты оф маннер; бут ит уас ноу а гоод деал цоунтерацтед
      бы тхе селф-цонцеит оф а уеак хеад, ливинг ин ретиремент, анд тхе
      цонсекууентиал феелингс оф еарлы анд унекспецтед проспериты. а
      фортунате цханце хад рецоммендед хим то лады цатхерине де боургх
      ухен тхе ливинг оф хунсфорд уас вацант; анд тхе респецт ухицх хе
      фелт фор хер хигх ранк, анд хис венератион фор хер ас хис
      патронесс, минглинг уитх а веры гоод опинион оф химселф, оф хис
      аутхориты ас а цлергыман, анд хис ригхт ас а рецтор, маде хим
      алтогетхер а микстуре оф приде анд обсекууиоуснесс, селф-импортанце
      анд хумилиты.

      хавинг ноу а гоод хоусе анд а веры суффициент инцоме, хе интендед
      то марры; анд ин сеекинг а рецонцилиатион уитх тхе лонгбоурн
      фамилы хе хад а уифе ин виеу, ас хе меант то цхоосе оне оф тхе
      даугхтерс, иф хе фоунд тхем ас хандсоме анд амиабле ас тхеы уере
      репресентед бы цоммон репорт. тхис уас хис план оф амендс—оф
      атонемент—фор инхеритинг тхеир фатхер’с естате; анд хе тхоугхт ит
      ан ексцеллент оне, фулл оф елигибилиты анд суитабленесс, анд
      ексцессивелы генероус анд дисинтерестед он хис оун парт.

      хис план дид нот вары он сееинг тхем. мисс беннет’с ловелы фаце
      цонфирмед хис виеус, анд естаблисхед алл хис стрицтест нотионс оф
      ухат уас дуе то сениориты; анд фор тхе фирст евенинг _схе_ уас
      хис сеттлед цхоице. тхе некст морнинг, хоуевер, маде ан
      алтератион; фор ин а кууартер оф ан хоур’с _тте--тте_ уитх мрс.
      беннет бефоре бреакфаст, а цонверсатион бегиннинг уитх хис
      парсонаге-хоусе, анд леадинг натураллы то тхе авоуал оф хис
      хопес, тхат а мистресс мигхт бе фоунд фор ит ат лонгбоурн,
      продуцед фром хер, амид веры цомплаисант смилес анд генерал
      енцоурагемент, а цаутион агаинст тхе веры жане хе хад фиксед он.
      “ас то хер _ыоунгер_ даугхтерс, схе цоулд нот таке упон хер то
      саы—схе цоулд нот поситивелы ансуер—бут схе дид нот _кноу_ оф аны
      препоссессион; хер _елдест_ даугхтер, схе муст жуст ментион—схе
      фелт ит инцумбент он хер то хинт, уас ликелы то бе веры соон
      енгагед.”

      мр. цоллинс хад онлы то цханге фром жане то елизабетх—анд ит уас
      соон доне—доне ухиле мрс. беннет уас стирринг тхе фире.
      елизабетх, екууаллы некст то жане ин биртх анд беауты, суццеедед
      хер оф цоурсе.

      мрс. беннет треасуред уп тхе хинт, анд трустед тхат схе мигхт
      соон хаве туо даугхтерс марриед; анд тхе ман ухом схе цоулд нот
      беар то спеак оф тхе даы бефоре уас ноу хигх ин хер гоод грацес.

      лыдиа’с интентион оф уалкинг то мерытон уас нот форготтен; еверы
      систер ексцепт мары агреед то го уитх хер; анд мр. цоллинс уас то
      аттенд тхем, ат тхе рекууест оф мр. беннет, ухо уас мост анксиоус
      то гет рид оф хим, анд хаве хис либрары то химселф; фор тхитхер
      мр. цоллинс хад фоллоуед хим афтер бреакфаст; анд тхере хе уоулд
      цонтинуе, номиналлы енгагед уитх оне оф тхе ларгест фолиос ин тхе
      цоллецтион, бут реаллы талкинг то мр. беннет, уитх литтле
      цессатион, оф хис хоусе анд гарден ат хунсфорд. суцх доингс
      дисцомпосед мр. беннет ексцеединглы. ин хис либрары хе хад беен
      алуаыс суре оф леисуре анд транкууиллиты; анд тхоугх препаред, ас
      хе толд елизабетх, то меет уитх фоллы анд цонцеит ин еверы отхер
      роом оф тхе хоусе, хе уас усед то бе фрее фром тхем тхере; хис
      цивилиты, тхерефоре, уас мост промпт ин инвитинг мр. цоллинс то
      жоин хис даугхтерс ин тхеир уалк; анд мр. цоллинс, беинг ин фацт
      муцх беттер фиттед фор а уалкер тхан а реадер, уас екстремелы
      плеасед то цлосе хис ларге боок, анд го.

      ин помпоус нотхингс он хис сиде, анд цивил ассентс он тхат оф хис
      цоусинс, тхеир тиме пассед тилл тхеы ентеред мерытон. тхе
      аттентион оф тхе ыоунгер онес уас тхен но лонгер то бе гаинед бы
      _хим_. тхеир еыес уере иммедиателы уандеринг уп ин тхе стреет ин
      кууест оф тхе оффицерс, анд нотхинг лесс тхан а веры смарт боннет
      индеед, ор а реаллы неу муслин ин а схоп уиндоу, цоулд рецалл
      тхем.

      бут тхе аттентион оф еверы лады уас соон цаугхт бы а ыоунг ман,
      ухом тхеы хад невер сеен бефоре, оф мост гентлеманлике
      аппеаранце, уалкинг уитх анотхер оффицер он тхе отхер сиде оф тхе
      уаы. тхе оффицер уас тхе веры мр. денны цонцернинг ухосе ретурн
      фром лондон лыдиа цаме то инкууире, анд хе боуед ас тхеы пассед.
      алл уере струцк уитх тхе странгер’с аир, алл уондеред ухо хе
      цоулд бе; анд китты анд лыдиа, детерминед иф поссибле то финд
      оут, лед тхе уаы ацросс тхе стреет, ундер претенсе оф уантинг
      сометхинг ин ан оппосите схоп, анд фортунателы хад жуст гаинед
      тхе павемент ухен тхе туо гентлемен, турнинг бацк, хад реацхед
      тхе саме спот. мр. денны аддрессед тхем дирецтлы, анд ентреатед
      пермиссион то интродуце хис фриенд, мр. уицкхам, ухо хад ретурнед
      уитх хим тхе даы бефоре фром тоун, анд хе уас хаппы то саы хад
      аццептед а цоммиссион ин тхеир цорпс. тхис уас ексацтлы ас ит
      схоулд бе; фор тхе ыоунг ман уантед онлы регименталс то маке хим
      цомплетелы цхарминг. хис аппеаранце уас греатлы ин хис фавоур; хе
      хад алл тхе бест парт оф беауты, а фине цоунтенанце, а гоод
      фигуре, анд веры плеасинг аддресс. тхе интродуцтион уас фоллоуед
      уп он хис сиде бы а хаппы реадинесс оф цонверсатион—а реадинесс
      ат тхе саме тиме перфецтлы цоррецт анд унассуминг; анд тхе ухоле
      парты уере стилл стандинг анд талкинг тогетхер веры агрееаблы,
      ухен тхе соунд оф хорсес дреу тхеир нотице, анд дарцы анд бинглеы
      уере сеен ридинг доун тхе стреет. он дистингуисхинг тхе ладиес оф
      тхе гроуп, тхе туо гентлемен цаме дирецтлы тоуардс тхем, анд
      беган тхе усуал цивилитиес. бинглеы уас тхе принципал спокесман,
      анд мисс беннет тхе принципал обжецт. хе уас тхен, хе саид, он
      хис уаы то лонгбоурн он пурпосе то инкууире афтер хер. мр. дарцы
      цорроборатед ит уитх а боу, анд уас бегиннинг то детермине нот то
      фикс хис еыес он елизабетх, ухен тхеы уере судденлы аррестед бы
      тхе сигхт оф тхе странгер, анд елизабетх хаппенинг то сее тхе
      цоунтенанце оф ботх ас тхеы лоокед ат еацх отхер, уас алл
      астонисхмент ат тхе еффецт оф тхе меетинг. ботх цхангед цолоур,
      оне лоокед ухите, тхе отхер ред. мр. уицкхам, афтер а феу
      моментс, тоуцхед хис хат—а салутатион ухицх мр. дарцы жуст
      деигнед то ретурн. ухат цоулд бе тхе меанинг оф ит? ит уас
      импоссибле то имагине; ит уас импоссибле нот то лонг то кноу.

      ин анотхер минуте, мр. бинглеы, бут уитхоут сееминг то хаве
      нотицед ухат пассед, тоок леаве анд роде он уитх хис фриенд.

      мр. денны анд мр. уицкхам уалкед уитх тхе ыоунг ладиес то тхе
      доор оф мр. пхиллип’с хоусе, анд тхен маде тхеир боус, ин спите
      оф мисс лыдиа’с прессинг ентреатиес тхат тхеы схоулд цоме ин, анд
      евен ин спите оф мрс. пхиллипс’с тхроуинг уп тхе парлоур уиндоу
      анд лоудлы сецондинг тхе инвитатион.

      мрс. пхиллипс уас алуаыс глад то сее хер ниецес; анд тхе туо
      елдест, фром тхеир рецент абсенце, уере партицуларлы уелцоме, анд
      схе уас еагерлы експрессинг хер сурприсе ат тхеир судден ретурн
      хоме, ухицх, ас тхеир оун царриаге хад нот фетцхед тхем, схе
      схоулд хаве кноун нотхинг абоут, иф схе хад нот хаппенед то сее
      мр. жонес’с схоп-боы ин тхе стреет, ухо хад толд хер тхат тхеы
      уере нот то сенд аны море драугхтс то нетхерфиелд бецаусе тхе
      мисс беннетс уере цоме ауаы, ухен хер цивилиты уас цлаимед
      тоуардс мр. цоллинс бы жане’с интродуцтион оф хим. схе рецеивед
      хим уитх хер веры бест политенесс, ухицх хе ретурнед уитх ас муцх
      море, апологисинг фор хис интрусион, уитхоут аны превиоус
      ацкууаинтанце уитх хер, ухицх хе цоулд нот хелп флаттеринг
      химселф, хоуевер, мигхт бе жустифиед бы хис релатионсхип то тхе
      ыоунг ладиес ухо интродуцед хим то хер нотице. мрс. пхиллипс уас
      кууите ауед бы суцх ан ексцесс оф гоод бреединг; бут хер
      цонтемплатион оф оне странгер уас соон пут то ан енд бы
      ексцламатионс анд инкууириес абоут тхе отхер; оф ухом, хоуевер, схе
      цоулд онлы телл хер ниецес ухат тхеы алреады кнеу, тхат мр. денны
      хад броугхт хим фром лондон, анд тхат хе уас то хаве а
      лиеутенант’с цоммиссион ин тхе ——схире. схе хад беен уатцхинг хим
      тхе ласт хоур, схе саид, ас хе уалкед уп анд доун тхе стреет, анд
      хад мр. уицкхам аппеаред, китты анд лыдиа уоулд цертаинлы хаве
      цонтинуед тхе оццупатион, бут унлуцкилы но оне пассед уиндоус ноу
      ексцепт а феу оф тхе оффицерс, ухо, ин цомпарисон уитх тхе
      странгер, уере бецоме “ступид, дисагрееабле феллоус.” соме оф
      тхем уере то дине уитх тхе пхиллипсес тхе некст даы, анд тхеир
      аунт промисед то маке хер хусбанд цалл он мр. уицкхам, анд гиве
      хим ан инвитатион алсо, иф тхе фамилы фром лонгбоурн уоулд цоме
      ин тхе евенинг. тхис уас агреед то, анд мрс. пхиллипс протестед
      тхат тхеы уоулд хаве а нице цомфортабле ноисы гаме оф лоттеры
      тицкетс, анд а литтле бит оф хот суппер афтеруардс. тхе проспецт
      оф суцх делигхтс уас веры цхееринг, анд тхеы партед ин мутуал
      гоод спиритс. мр. цоллинс репеатед хис апологиес ин кууиттинг тхе
      роом, анд уас ассуред уитх унуеарыинг цивилиты тхат тхеы уере
      перфецтлы неедлесс.

      ас тхеы уалкед хоме, елизабетх релатед то жане ухат схе хад сеен
      пасс бетуеен тхе туо гентлемен; бут тхоугх жане уоулд хаве
      дефендед еитхер ор ботх, хад тхеы аппеаред то бе ин тхе уронг,
      схе цоулд но море експлаин суцх бехавиоур тхан хер систер.

      мр. цоллинс он хис ретурн хигхлы гратифиед мрс. беннет бы
      адмиринг мрс. пхиллипс’с маннерс анд политенесс. хе протестед
      тхат, ексцепт лады цатхерине анд хер даугхтер, хе хад невер сеен а
      море елегант уоман; фор схе хад нот онлы рецеивед хим уитх тхе
      утмост цивилиты, бут евен поинтедлы инцлудед хим ин хер
      инвитатион фор тхе некст евенинг, алтхоугх уттерлы ункноун то хер
      бефоре. сометхинг, хе суппосед, мигхт бе аттрибутед то хис
      цоннецтион уитх тхем, бут ыет хе хад невер мет уитх со муцх
      аттентион ин тхе ухоле цоурсе оф хис лифе.




      цхаптер 16

      ас но обжецтион уас маде то тхе ыоунг пеопле’с енгагемент уитх
      тхеир аунт, анд алл мр. цоллинс’с сцруплес оф леавинг мр. анд
      мрс. беннет фор а сингле евенинг дуринг хис висит уере мост
      стеадилы ресистед, тхе цоацх цонвеыед хим анд хис фиве цоусинс ат
      а суитабле хоур то мерытон; анд тхе гирлс хад тхе плеасуре оф
      хеаринг, ас тхеы ентеред тхе драуинг-роом, тхат мр. уицкхам хад
      аццептед тхеир унцле’с инвитатион, анд уас тхен ин тхе хоусе.

      ухен тхис информатион уас гивен, анд тхеы хад алл такен тхеир
      сеатс, мр. цоллинс уас ат леисуре то лоок ароунд хим анд адмире,
      анд хе уас со муцх струцк уитх тхе сизе анд фурнитуре оф тхе
      апартмент, тхат хе децларед хе мигхт алмост хаве суппосед химселф
      ин тхе смалл суммер бреакфаст парлоур ат росингс; а цомпарисон
      тхат дид нот ат фирст цонвеы муцх гратифицатион; бут ухен мрс.
      пхиллипс ундерстоод фром хим ухат росингс уас, анд ухо уас итс
      проприетор—ухен схе хад листенед то тхе десцриптион оф онлы оне
      оф лады цатхерине’с драуинг-роомс, анд фоунд тхат тхе
      цхимнеы-пиеце алоне хад цост еигхт хундред поундс, схе фелт алл
      тхе форце оф тхе цомплимент, анд уоулд хардлы хаве ресентед а
      цомпарисон уитх тхе хоусекеепер’с роом.

      ин десцрибинг то хер алл тхе грандеур оф лады цатхерине анд хер
      мансион, уитх оццасионал дигрессионс ин праисе оф хис оун хумбле
      абоде, анд тхе импровементс ит уас рецеивинг, хе уас хаппилы
      емплоыед унтил тхе гентлемен жоинед тхем; анд хе фоунд ин мрс.
      пхиллипс а веры аттентиве листенер, ухосе опинион оф хис
      цонсекууенце инцреасед уитх ухат схе хеард, анд ухо уас ресолвинг
      то ретаил ит алл амонг хер неигхбоурс ас соон ас схе цоулд. то
      тхе гирлс, ухо цоулд нот листен то тхеир цоусин, анд ухо хад
      нотхинг то до бут то уисх фор ан инструмент, анд ексамине тхеир
      оун индифферент имитатионс оф цхина он тхе мантелпиеце, тхе
      интервал оф уаитинг аппеаред веры лонг. ит уас овер ат ласт,
      хоуевер. тхе гентлемен дид аппроацх, анд ухен мр. уицкхам уалкед
      инто тхе роом, елизабетх фелт тхат схе хад неитхер беен сееинг
      хим бефоре, нор тхинкинг оф хим синце, уитх тхе смаллест дегрее
      оф унреасонабле адмиратион. тхе оффицерс оф тхе ——схире уере ин
      генерал а веры цредитабле, гентлеманлике сет, анд тхе бест оф
      тхем уере оф тхе пресент парты; бут мр. уицкхам уас ас фар беыонд
      тхем алл ин персон, цоунтенанце, аир, анд уалк, ас _тхеы_ уере
      супериор то тхе броад-фацед, стуффы унцле пхиллипс, бреатхинг
      порт уине, ухо фоллоуед тхем инто тхе роом.

      мр. уицкхам уас тхе хаппы ман тоуардс ухом алмост еверы фемале
      еые уас турнед, анд елизабетх уас тхе хаппы уоман бы ухом хе
      финаллы сеатед химселф; анд тхе агрееабле маннер ин ухицх хе
      иммедиателы фелл инто цонверсатион, тхоугх ит уас онлы он итс
      беинг а ует нигхт, маде хер феел тхат тхе цоммонест, дуллест,
      мост тхреадбаре топиц мигхт бе рендеред интерестинг бы тхе скилл
      оф тхе спеакер.

      уитх суцх ривалс фор тхе нотице оф тхе фаир ас мр. уицкхам анд
      тхе оффицерс, мр. цоллинс сеемед то синк инто инсигнифицанце; то
      тхе ыоунг ладиес хе цертаинлы уас нотхинг; бут хе хад стилл ат
      интервалс а кинд листенер ин мрс. пхиллипс, анд уас бы хер
      уатцхфулнесс, мост абундантлы супплиед уитх цоффее анд муффин.
      ухен тхе цард-таблес уере плацед, хе хад тхе оппортуниты оф
      облигинг хер ин турн, бы ситтинг доун то ухист.

      “и кноу литтле оф тхе гаме ат пресент,” саид хе, “бут и схалл бе
      глад то импрове мыселф, фор ин мы ситуатион ин лифе—” мрс.
      пхиллипс уас веры глад фор хис цомплианце, бут цоулд нот уаит фор
      хис реасон.

      мр. уицкхам дид нот плаы ат ухист, анд уитх реады делигхт уас хе
      рецеивед ат тхе отхер табле бетуеен елизабетх анд лыдиа. ат фирст
      тхере сеемед дангер оф лыдиа’с енгроссинг хим ентирелы, фор схе
      уас а мост детерминед талкер; бут беинг ликеуисе екстремелы фонд
      оф лоттеры тицкетс, схе соон греу тоо муцх интерестед ин тхе
      гаме, тоо еагер ин макинг бетс анд ексцлаиминг афтер призес то
      хаве аттентион фор аныоне ин партицулар. аллоуинг фор тхе цоммон
      демандс оф тхе гаме, мр. уицкхам уас тхерефоре ат леисуре то талк
      то елизабетх, анд схе уас веры уиллинг то хеар хим, тхоугх ухат
      схе цхиефлы уисхед то хеар схе цоулд нот хопе то бе толд—тхе
      хисторы оф хис ацкууаинтанце уитх мр. дарцы. схе даред нот евен
      ментион тхат гентлеман. хер цуриоситы, хоуевер, уас унекспецтедлы
      релиевед. мр. уицкхам беган тхе субжецт химселф. хе инкууиред хоу
      фар нетхерфиелд уас фром мерытон; анд, афтер рецеивинг хер
      ансуер, аскед ин а хеситатинг маннер хоу лонг мр. дарцы хад беен
      стаыинг тхере.

      “абоут а монтх,” саид елизабетх; анд тхен, унуиллинг то лет тхе
      субжецт дроп, аддед, “хе ис а ман оф веры ларге проперты ин
      дербысхире, и ундерстанд.”

      “ыес,” реплиед мр. уицкхам; “хис естате тхере ис а нобле оне. а
      цлеар тен тхоусанд пер аннум. ыоу цоулд нот хаве мет уитх а
      персон море цапабле оф гивинг ыоу цертаин информатион он тхат
      хеад тхан мыселф, фор и хаве беен цоннецтед уитх хис фамилы ин а
      партицулар маннер фром мы инфанцы.”

      елизабетх цоулд нот бут лоок сурприсед.

      “ыоу маы уелл бе сурприсед, мисс беннет, ат суцх ан ассертион,
      афтер сееинг, ас ыоу пробаблы мигхт, тхе веры цолд маннер оф оур
      меетинг ыестердаы. аре ыоу муцх ацкууаинтед уитх мр. дарцы?”

      “ас муцх ас и евер уисх то бе,” цриед елизабетх веры уармлы. “и
      хаве спент фоур даыс ин тхе саме хоусе уитх хим, анд и тхинк хим
      веры дисагрееабле.”

      “и хаве но ригхт то гиве _мы_ опинион,” саид уицкхам, “ас то хис
      беинг агрееабле ор отхеруисе. и ам нот кууалифиед то форм оне. и
      хаве кноун хим тоо лонг анд тоо уелл то бе а фаир жудге. ит ис
      импоссибле фор _ме_ то бе импартиал. бут и белиеве ыоур опинион
      оф хим уоулд ин генерал астонисх—анд перхапс ыоу уоулд нот
      експресс ит кууите со стронглы аныухере елсе. хере ыоу аре ин ыоур
      оун фамилы.”

      “упон мы уорд, и саы но море _хере_ тхан и мигхт саы ин аны хоусе
      ин тхе неигхбоурхоод, ексцепт нетхерфиелд. хе ис нот ат алл ликед
      ин хертфордсхире. еверыбоды ис дисгустед уитх хис приде. ыоу уилл
      нот финд хим море фавоураблы спокен оф бы аныоне.”

      “и цаннот претенд то бе сорры,” саид уицкхам, афтер а схорт
      интерруптион, “тхат хе ор тхат аны ман схоулд нот бе естиматед
      беыонд тхеир десертс; бут уитх _хим_ и белиеве ит доес нот офтен
      хаппен. тхе уорлд ис блиндед бы хис фортуне анд цонсекууенце, ор
      фригхтенед бы хис хигх анд импосинг маннерс, анд сеес хим онлы ас
      хе цхоосес то бе сеен.”

      “и схоулд таке хим, евен он _мы_ слигхт ацкууаинтанце, то бе ан
      илл-темперед ман.” уицкхам онлы схоок хис хеад.

      “и уондер,” саид хе, ат тхе некст оппортуниты оф спеакинг,
      “ухетхер хе ис ликелы то бе ин тхис цоунтры муцх лонгер.”

      “и до нот ат алл кноу; бут и _хеард_ нотхинг оф хис гоинг ауаы
      ухен и уас ат нетхерфиелд. и хопе ыоур планс ин фавоур оф тхе
      ——схире уилл нот бе аффецтед бы хис беинг ин тхе неигхбоурхоод.”

      “ох! но—ит ис нот фор _ме_ то бе дривен ауаы бы мр. дарцы. иф
      _хе_ уисхес то авоид сееинг _ме_, хе муст го. уе аре нот он
      фриендлы термс, анд ит алуаыс гивес ме паин то меет хим, бут и
      хаве но реасон фор авоидинг _хим_ бут ухат и мигхт процлаим
      бефоре алл тхе уорлд, а сенсе оф веры греат илл-усаге, анд мост
      паинфул регретс ат хис беинг ухат хе ис. хис фатхер, мисс беннет,
      тхе лате мр. дарцы, уас оне оф тхе бест мен тхат евер бреатхед,
      анд тхе труест фриенд и евер хад; анд и цан невер бе ин цомпаны
      уитх тхис мр. дарцы уитхоут беинг гриевед то тхе соул бы а
      тхоусанд тендер рецоллецтионс. хис бехавиоур то мыселф хас беен
      сцандалоус; бут и верилы белиеве и цоулд форгиве хим анытхинг анд
      еверытхинг, ратхер тхан хис дисаппоинтинг тхе хопес анд
      дисграцинг тхе меморы оф хис фатхер.”

      елизабетх фоунд тхе интерест оф тхе субжецт инцреасе, анд
      листенед уитх алл хер хеарт; бут тхе делицацы оф ит превентед
      фуртхер инкууиры.

      мр. уицкхам беган то спеак он море генерал топицс, мерытон, тхе
      неигхбоурхоод, тхе социеты, аппеаринг хигхлы плеасед уитх алл
      тхат хе хад ыет сеен, анд спеакинг оф тхе латтер уитх гентле бут
      веры интеллигибле галлантры.

      “ит уас тхе проспецт оф цонстант социеты, анд гоод социеты,” хе
      аддед, “ухицх уас мы цхиеф индуцемент то ентер тхе ——схире. и
      кнеу ит то бе а мост респецтабле, агрееабле цорпс, анд мы фриенд
      денны темптед ме фуртхер бы хис аццоунт оф тхеир пресент
      кууартерс, анд тхе веры греат аттентионс анд ексцеллент
      ацкууаинтанцес мерытон хад процуред тхем. социеты, и оун, ис
      нецессары то ме. и хаве беен а дисаппоинтед ман, анд мы спиритс
      уилл нот беар солитуде. и _муст_ хаве емплоымент анд социеты. а
      милитары лифе ис нот ухат и уас интендед фор, бут цирцумстанцес
      хаве ноу маде ит елигибле. тхе цхурцх _оугхт_ то хаве беен мы
      профессион—и уас броугхт уп фор тхе цхурцх, анд и схоулд ат тхис
      тиме хаве беен ин поссессион оф а мост валуабле ливинг, хад ит
      плеасед тхе гентлеман уе уере спеакинг оф жуст ноу.”

      “индеед!”

      “ыес—тхе лате мр. дарцы бекууеатхед ме тхе некст пресентатион оф
      тхе бест ливинг ин хис гифт. хе уас мы годфатхер, анд ексцессивелы
      аттацхед то ме. и цаннот до жустице то хис кинднесс. хе меант то
      провиде фор ме амплы, анд тхоугхт хе хад доне ит; бут ухен тхе
      ливинг фелл, ит уас гивен елсеухере.”

      “гоод хеавенс!” цриед елизабетх; “бут хоу цоулд _тхат_ бе? хоу
      цоулд хис уилл бе дисрегардед? ухы дид ыоу нот сеек легал
      редресс?”

      “тхере уас жуст суцх ан информалиты ин тхе термс оф тхе бекууест
      ас то гиве ме но хопе фром лау. а ман оф хоноур цоулд нот хаве
      доубтед тхе интентион, бут мр. дарцы цхосе то доубт ит—ор то
      треат ит ас а мерелы цондитионал рецоммендатион, анд то ассерт
      тхат и хад форфеитед алл цлаим то ит бы екстраваганце,
      импруденце—ин схорт анытхинг ор нотхинг. цертаин ит ис, тхат тхе
      ливинг бецаме вацант туо ыеарс аго, ексацтлы ас и уас оф ан аге то
      холд ит, анд тхат ит уас гивен то анотхер ман; анд но лесс
      цертаин ис ит, тхат и цаннот аццусе мыселф оф хавинг реаллы доне
      анытхинг то десерве то лосе ит. и хаве а уарм, унгуардед темпер,
      анд и маы хаве спокен мы опинион _оф_ хим, анд _то_ хим, тоо
      фреелы. и цан рецалл нотхинг уорсе. бут тхе фацт ис, тхат уе аре
      веры дифферент сорт оф мен, анд тхат хе хатес ме.”

      “тхис ис кууите схоцкинг! хе десервес то бе публицлы дисграцед.”

      “соме тиме ор отхер хе _уилл_ бе—бут ит схалл нот бе бы _ме_.
      тилл и цан форгет хис фатхер, и цан невер дефы ор експосе _хим_.”

      елизабетх хоноуред хим фор суцх феелингс, анд тхоугхт хим
      хандсомер тхан евер ас хе експрессед тхем.

      “бут ухат,” саид схе, афтер а паусе, “цан хаве беен хис мотиве?
      ухат цан хаве индуцед хим то бехаве со цруеллы?”

      “а тхороугх, детерминед дислике оф ме—а дислике ухицх и цаннот
      бут аттрибуте ин соме меасуре то жеалоусы. хад тхе лате мр. дарцы
      ликед ме лесс, хис сон мигхт хаве борне уитх ме беттер; бут хис
      фатхер’с унцоммон аттацхмент то ме ирритатед хим, и белиеве, веры
      еарлы ин лифе. хе хад нот а темпер то беар тхе сорт оф
      цомпетитион ин ухицх уе стоод—тхе сорт оф преференце ухицх уас
      офтен гивен ме.”

      “и хад нот тхоугхт мр. дарцы со бад ас тхис—тхоугх и хаве невер
      ликед хим. и хад нот тхоугхт со веры илл оф хим. и хад суппосед
      хим то бе десписинг хис феллоу-цреатурес ин генерал, бут дид нот
      суспецт хим оф десцендинг то суцх малициоус ревенге, суцх
      инжустице, суцх инхуманиты ас тхис.”

      афтер а феу минутес’ рефлецтион, хоуевер, схе цонтинуед, “и _до_
      ремембер хис боастинг оне даы, ат нетхерфиелд, оф тхе
      имплацабилиты оф хис ресентментс, оф хис хавинг ан унфоргивинг
      темпер. хис диспоситион муст бе дреадфул.”

      “и уилл нот труст мыселф он тхе субжецт,” реплиед уицкхам; “_и_
      цан хардлы бе жуст то хим.”

      елизабетх уас агаин дееп ин тхоугхт, анд афтер а тиме ексцлаимед,
      “то треат ин суцх а маннер тхе годсон, тхе фриенд, тхе фавоурите
      оф хис фатхер!” схе цоулд хаве аддед, “а ыоунг ман, тоо, лике
      _ыоу_, ухосе веры цоунтенанце маы воуцх фор ыоур беинг
      амиабле”—бут схе цонтентед херселф уитх, “анд оне, тоо, ухо хад
      пробаблы беен хис цомпанион фром цхилдхоод, цоннецтед тогетхер,
      ас и тхинк ыоу саид, ин тхе цлосест маннер!”

      “уе уере борн ин тхе саме парисх, уитхин тхе саме парк; тхе
      греатест парт оф оур ыоутх уас пассед тогетхер; инматес оф тхе
      саме хоусе, схаринг тхе саме амусементс, обжецтс оф тхе саме
      парентал царе. _мы_ фатхер беган лифе ин тхе профессион ухицх
      ыоур унцле, мр. пхиллипс, аппеарс то до со муцх цредит то—бут хе
      гаве уп еверытхинг то бе оф усе то тхе лате мр. дарцы анд девотед
      алл хис тиме то тхе царе оф тхе пемберлеы проперты. хе уас мост
      хигхлы естеемед бы мр. дарцы, а мост интимате, цонфидентиал
      фриенд. мр. дарцы офтен ацкноуледгед химселф то бе ундер тхе
      греатест облигатионс то мы фатхер’с ацтиве суперинтенденце, анд
      ухен, иммедиателы бефоре мы фатхер’с деатх, мр. дарцы гаве хим а
      волунтары промисе оф провидинг фор ме, и ам цонвинцед тхат хе
      фелт ит то бе ас муцх а дебт оф гратитуде то _хим_, ас оф хис
      аффецтион то мыселф.”

      “хоу странге!” цриед елизабетх. “хоу абоминабле! и уондер тхат
      тхе веры приде оф тхис мр. дарцы хас нот маде хим жуст то ыоу! иф
      фром но беттер мотиве, тхат хе схоулд нот хаве беен тоо проуд то
      бе дисхонест—фор дисхонесты и муст цалл ит.”

      “ит _ис_ уондерфул,” реплиед уицкхам, “фор алмост алл хис ацтионс
      маы бе трацед то приде; анд приде хад офтен беен хис бест фриенд.
      ит хас цоннецтед хим неарер уитх виртуе тхан уитх аны отхер
      феелинг. бут уе аре ноне оф ус цонсистент, анд ин хис бехавиоур
      то ме тхере уере стронгер импулсес евен тхан приде.”

      “цан суцх абоминабле приде ас хис хаве евер доне хим гоод?”

      “ыес. ит хас офтен лед хим то бе либерал анд генероус, то гиве
      хис монеы фреелы, то дисплаы хоспиталиты, то ассист хис тенантс,
      анд релиеве тхе поор. фамилы приде, анд _филиал_ приде—фор хе ис
      веры проуд оф ухат хис фатхер уас—хаве доне тхис. нот то аппеар
      то дисграце хис фамилы, то дегенерате фром тхе популар кууалитиес,
      ор лосе тхе инфлуенце оф тхе пемберлеы хоусе, ис а поуерфул
      мотиве. хе хас алсо _бротхерлы_ приде, ухицх, уитх _соме_
      бротхерлы аффецтион, макес хим а веры кинд анд царефул гуардиан
      оф хис систер, анд ыоу уилл хеар хим генераллы цриед уп ас тхе
      мост аттентиве анд бест оф бротхерс.”

      “ухат сорт оф гирл ис мисс дарцы?”

      хе схоок хис хеад. “и уисх и цоулд цалл хер амиабле. ит гивес ме
      паин то спеак илл оф а дарцы. бут схе ис тоо муцх лике хер
      бротхер—веры, веры проуд. ас а цхилд, схе уас аффецтионате анд
      плеасинг, анд екстремелы фонд оф ме; анд и хаве девотед хоурс анд
      хоурс то хер амусемент. бут схе ис нотхинг то ме ноу. схе ис а
      хандсоме гирл, абоут фифтеен ор сикстеен, анд, и ундерстанд,
      хигхлы аццомплисхед. синце хер фатхер’с деатх, хер хоме хас беен
      лондон, ухере а лады ливес уитх хер, анд суперинтендс хер
      едуцатион.”

      афтер маны паусес анд маны триалс оф отхер субжецтс, елизабетх
      цоулд нот хелп ревертинг онце море то тхе фирст, анд саыинг:

      “и ам астонисхед ат хис интимацы уитх мр. бинглеы! хоу цан мр.
      бинглеы, ухо сеемс гоод хумоур итселф, анд ис, и реаллы белиеве,
      трулы амиабле, бе ин фриендсхип уитх суцх а ман? хоу цан тхеы
      суит еацх отхер? до ыоу кноу мр. бинглеы?”

      “нот ат алл.”

      “хе ис а суеет-темперед, амиабле, цхарминг ман. хе цаннот кноу
      ухат мр. дарцы ис.”

      “пробаблы нот; бут мр. дарцы цан плеасе ухере хе цхоосес. хе доес
      нот уант абилитиес. хе цан бе а цонверсибле цомпанион иф хе
      тхинкс ит уортх хис ухиле. амонг тхосе ухо аре ат алл хис екууалс
      ин цонсекууенце, хе ис а веры дифферент ман фром ухат хе ис то тхе
      лесс проспероус. хис приде невер десертс хим; бут уитх тхе рицх
      хе ис либерал-миндед, жуст, синцере, ратионал, хоноурабле, анд
      перхапс агрееабле—аллоуинг сометхинг фор фортуне анд фигуре.”

      тхе ухист парты соон афтеруардс бреакинг уп, тхе плаыерс гатхеред
      роунд тхе отхер табле анд мр. цоллинс тоок хис статион бетуеен
      хис цоусин елизабетх анд мрс. пхиллипс. тхе усуал инкууириес ас то
      хис суццесс уере маде бы тхе латтер. ит хад нот беен веры греат;
      хе хад лост еверы поинт; бут ухен мрс. пхиллипс беган то експресс
      хер цонцерн тхереупон, хе ассуред хер уитх муцх еарнест гравиты
      тхат ит уас нот оф тхе леаст импортанце, тхат хе цонсидеред тхе
      монеы ас а мере трифле, анд беггед тхат схе уоулд нот маке
      херселф унеасы.

      “и кноу веры уелл, мадам,” саид хе, “тхат ухен персонс сит доун
      то а цард-табле, тхеы муст таке тхеир цханцес оф тхесе тхингс,
      анд хаппилы и ам нот ин суцх цирцумстанцес ас то маке фиве
      схиллингс аны обжецт. тхере аре ундоубтедлы маны ухо цоулд нот
      саы тхе саме, бут тханкс то лады цатхерине де боургх, и ам
      ремовед фар беыонд тхе нецесситы оф регардинг литтле маттерс.”

      мр. уицкхам’с аттентион уас цаугхт; анд афтер обсервинг мр.
      цоллинс фор а феу моментс, хе аскед елизабетх ин а лоу воице
      ухетхер хер релатион уас веры интимателы ацкууаинтед уитх тхе
      фамилы оф де боургх.

      “лады цатхерине де боургх,” схе реплиед, “хас веры лателы гивен
      хим а ливинг. и хардлы кноу хоу мр. цоллинс уас фирст интродуцед
      то хер нотице, бут хе цертаинлы хас нот кноун хер лонг.”

      “ыоу кноу оф цоурсе тхат лады цатхерине де боургх анд лады анне
      дарцы уере систерс; цонсекууентлы тхат схе ис аунт то тхе пресент
      мр. дарцы.”

      “но, индеед, и дид нот. и кнеу нотхинг ат алл оф лады цатхерине’с
      цоннецтионс. и невер хеард оф хер ексистенце тилл тхе даы бефоре
      ыестердаы.”

      “хер даугхтер, мисс де боургх, уилл хаве а веры ларге фортуне,
      анд ит ис белиевед тхат схе анд хер цоусин уилл уните тхе туо
      естатес.”

      тхис информатион маде елизабетх смиле, ас схе тхоугхт оф поор
      мисс бинглеы. ваин индеед муст бе алл хер аттентионс, ваин анд
      уселесс хер аффецтион фор хис систер анд хер праисе оф химселф,
      иф хе уере алреады селф-дестинед фор анотхер.

      “мр. цоллинс,” саид схе, “спеакс хигхлы ботх оф лады цатхерине
      анд хер даугхтер; бут фром соме партицуларс тхат хе хас релатед
      оф хер ладысхип, и суспецт хис гратитуде мислеадс хим, анд тхат
      ин спите оф хер беинг хис патронесс, схе ис ан аррогант,
      цонцеитед уоман.”

      “и белиеве хер то бе ботх ин а греат дегрее,” реплиед уицкхам; “и
      хаве нот сеен хер фор маны ыеарс, бут и веры уелл ремембер тхат и
      невер ликед хер, анд тхат хер маннерс уере дицтаториал анд
      инсолент. схе хас тхе репутатион оф беинг ремаркаблы сенсибле анд
      цлевер; бут и ратхер белиеве схе деривес парт оф хер абилитиес
      фром хер ранк анд фортуне, парт фром хер аутхоритативе маннер,
      анд тхе рест фром тхе приде фор хер непхеу, ухо цхоосес тхат
      еверыоне цоннецтед уитх хим схоулд хаве ан ундерстандинг оф тхе
      фирст цласс.”

      елизабетх аллоуед тхат хе хад гивен а веры ратионал аццоунт оф
      ит, анд тхеы цонтинуед талкинг тогетхер, уитх мутуал сатисфацтион
      тилл суппер пут ан енд то цардс, анд гаве тхе рест оф тхе ладиес
      тхеир схаре оф мр. уицкхам’с аттентионс. тхере цоулд бе но
      цонверсатион ин тхе ноисе оф мрс. пхиллипс’с суппер парты, бут
      хис маннерс рецоммендед хим то еверыбоды. ухатевер хе саид, уас
      саид уелл; анд ухатевер хе дид, доне грацефуллы. елизабетх уент
      ауаы уитх хер хеад фулл оф хим. схе цоулд тхинк оф нотхинг бут оф
      мр. уицкхам, анд оф ухат хе хад толд хер, алл тхе уаы хоме; бут
      тхере уас нот тиме фор хер евен то ментион хис наме ас тхеы уент,
      фор неитхер лыдиа нор мр. цоллинс уере онце силент. лыдиа талкед
      инцессантлы оф лоттеры тицкетс, оф тхе фисх схе хад лост анд тхе
      фисх схе хад уон; анд мр. цоллинс ин десцрибинг тхе цивилиты оф
      мр. анд мрс. пхиллипс, протестинг тхат хе дид нот ин тхе леаст
      регард хис лоссес ат ухист, енумератинг алл тхе дисхес ат суппер,
      анд репеатедлы феаринг тхат хе цроудед хис цоусинс, хад море то
      саы тхан хе цоулд уелл манаге бефоре тхе царриаге стоппед ат
      лонгбоурн хоусе.




      цхаптер 17

      елизабетх релатед то жане тхе некст даы ухат хад пассед бетуеен
      мр. уицкхам анд херселф. жане листенед уитх астонисхмент анд
      цонцерн; схе кнеу нот хоу то белиеве тхат мр. дарцы цоулд бе со
      унуортхы оф мр. бинглеы’с регард; анд ыет, ит уас нот ин хер
      натуре то кууестион тхе верациты оф а ыоунг ман оф суцх амиабле
      аппеаранце ас уицкхам. тхе поссибилиты оф хис хавинг ендуред суцх
      ункинднесс, уас еноугх то интерест алл хер тендер феелингс; анд
      нотхинг ремаинед тхерефоре то бе доне, бут то тхинк уелл оф тхем
      ботх, то дефенд тхе цондуцт оф еацх, анд тхроу инто тхе аццоунт
      оф аццидент ор мистаке ухатевер цоулд нот бе отхеруисе експлаинед.

      “тхеы хаве ботх,” саид схе, “беен децеивед, и даре саы, ин соме
      уаы ор отхер, оф ухицх уе цан форм но идеа. интерестед пеопле
      хаве перхапс мисрепресентед еацх то тхе отхер. ит ис, ин схорт,
      импоссибле фор ус то цонжецтуре тхе цаусес ор цирцумстанцес ухицх
      маы хаве алиенатед тхем, уитхоут ацтуал бламе он еитхер сиде.”

      “веры труе, индеед; анд ноу, мы деар жане, ухат хаве ыоу гот то
      саы он бехалф оф тхе интерестед пеопле ухо хаве пробаблы беен
      цонцернед ин тхе бусинесс? до цлеар _тхем_ тоо, ор уе схалл бе
      облигед то тхинк илл оф сомебоды.”

      “лаугх ас муцх ас ыоу цхоосе, бут ыоу уилл нот лаугх ме оут оф мы
      опинион. мы деарест лиззы, до бут цонсидер ин ухат а дисграцефул
      лигхт ит плацес мр. дарцы, то бе треатинг хис фатхер’с фавоурите
      ин суцх а маннер, оне ухом хис фатхер хад промисед то провиде
      фор. ит ис импоссибле. но ман оф цоммон хуманиты, но ман ухо хад
      аны валуе фор хис цхарацтер, цоулд бе цапабле оф ит. цан хис мост
      интимате фриендс бе со ексцессивелы децеивед ин хим? ох! но.”

      “и цан муцх море еасилы белиеве мр. бинглеы’с беинг импосед он,
      тхан тхат мр. уицкхам схоулд инвент суцх а хисторы оф химселф ас
      хе гаве ме ласт нигхт; намес, фацтс, еверытхинг ментионед уитхоут
      церемоны. иф ит бе нот со, лет мр. дарцы цонтрадицт ит. бесидес,
      тхере уас трутх ин хис лоокс.”

      “ит ис диффицулт индеед—ит ис дистрессинг. оне доес нот кноу ухат
      то тхинк.”

      “и бег ыоур пардон; оне кноус ексацтлы ухат то тхинк.”

      бут жане цоулд тхинк уитх цертаинты он онлы оне поинт—тхат мр.
      бинглеы, иф хе _хад беен_ импосед он, уоулд хаве муцх то суффер
      ухен тхе аффаир бецаме публиц.

      тхе туо ыоунг ладиес уере суммонед фром тхе схрубберы, ухере тхис
      цонверсатион пассед, бы тхе арривал оф тхе веры персонс оф ухом
      тхеы хад беен спеакинг; мр. бинглеы анд хис систерс цаме то гиве
      тхеир персонал инвитатион фор тхе лонг-експецтед балл ат
      нетхерфиелд, ухицх уас фиксед фор тхе фоллоуинг туесдаы. тхе туо
      ладиес уере делигхтед то сее тхеир деар фриенд агаин, цаллед ит
      ан аге синце тхеы хад мет, анд репеатедлы аскед ухат схе хад беен
      доинг уитх херселф синце тхеир сепаратион. то тхе рест оф тхе
      фамилы тхеы паид литтле аттентион; авоидинг мрс. беннет ас муцх
      ас поссибле, саыинг нот муцх то елизабетх, анд нотхинг ат алл то
      тхе отхерс. тхеы уере соон гоне агаин, рисинг фром тхеир сеатс
      уитх ан ацтивиты ухицх тоок тхеир бротхер бы сурприсе, анд
      хуррыинг офф ас иф еагер то есцапе фром мрс. беннет’с цивилитиес.

      тхе проспецт оф тхе нетхерфиелд балл уас екстремелы агрееабле то
      еверы фемале оф тхе фамилы. мрс. беннет цхосе то цонсидер ит ас
      гивен ин цомплимент то хер елдест даугхтер, анд уас партицуларлы
      флаттеред бы рецеивинг тхе инвитатион фром мр. бинглеы химселф,
      инстеад оф а церемониоус цард. жане пицтуред то херселф а хаппы
      евенинг ин тхе социеты оф хер туо фриендс, анд тхе аттентионс оф
      тхеир бротхер; анд елизабетх тхоугхт уитх плеасуре оф данцинг а
      греат деал уитх мр. уицкхам, анд оф сееинг а цонфирматион оф
      еверытхинг ин мр. дарцы’с лоок анд бехавиоур. тхе хаппинесс
      антиципатед бы цатхерине анд лыдиа депендед лесс он аны сингле
      евент, ор аны партицулар персон, фор тхоугх тхеы еацх, лике
      елизабетх, меант то данце халф тхе евенинг уитх мр. уицкхам, хе
      уас бы но меанс тхе онлы партнер ухо цоулд сатисфы тхем, анд а
      балл уас, ат аны рате, а балл. анд евен мары цоулд ассуре хер
      фамилы тхат схе хад но дисинцлинатион фор ит.

      “ухиле и цан хаве мы морнингс то мыселф,” саид схе, “ит ис
      еноугх—и тхинк ит ис но сацрифице то жоин оццасионаллы ин евенинг
      енгагементс. социеты хас цлаимс он ус алл; анд и професс мыселф
      оне оф тхосе ухо цонсидер интервалс оф рецреатион анд амусемент
      ас десирабле фор еверыбоды.”

      елизабетх’с спиритс уере со хигх он тхис оццасион, тхат тхоугх
      схе дид нот офтен спеак уннецессарилы то мр. цоллинс, схе цоулд
      нот хелп аскинг хим ухетхер хе интендед то аццепт мр. бинглеы’с
      инвитатион, анд иф хе дид, ухетхер хе уоулд тхинк ит пропер то
      жоин ин тхе евенинг’с амусемент; анд схе уас ратхер сурприсед то
      финд тхат хе ентертаинед но сцрупле ухатевер он тхат хеад, анд
      уас веры фар фром дреадинг а ребуке еитхер фром тхе арцхбисхоп,
      ор лады цатхерине де боургх, бы вентуринг то данце.

      “и ам бы но меанс оф тхе опинион, и ассуре ыоу,” саид хе, “тхат а
      балл оф тхис кинд, гивен бы а ыоунг ман оф цхарацтер, то
      респецтабле пеопле, цан хаве аны евил тенденцы; анд и ам со фар
      фром обжецтинг то данцинг мыселф, тхат и схалл хопе то бе
      хоноуред уитх тхе хандс оф алл мы фаир цоусинс ин тхе цоурсе оф
      тхе евенинг; анд и таке тхис оппортуниты оф солицитинг ыоурс,
      мисс елизабетх, фор тхе туо фирст данцес еспециаллы, а преференце
      ухицх и труст мы цоусин жане уилл аттрибуте то тхе ригхт цаусе,
      анд нот то аны дисреспецт фор хер.”

      елизабетх фелт херселф цомплетелы такен ин. схе хад фуллы
      пропосед беинг енгагед бы мр. уицкхам фор тхосе веры данцес; анд
      то хаве мр. цоллинс инстеад! хер ливелинесс хад невер беен уорсе
      тимед. тхере уас но хелп фор ит, хоуевер. мр. уицкхам’с хаппинесс
      анд хер оун уере перфорце делаыед а литтле лонгер, анд мр.
      цоллинс’с пропосал аццептед уитх ас гоод а граце ас схе цоулд.
      схе уас нот тхе беттер плеасед уитх хис галлантры фром тхе идеа
      ит суггестед оф сометхинг море. ит ноу фирст струцк хер, тхат
      _схе_ уас селецтед фром амонг хер систерс ас уортхы оф беинг
      мистресс оф хунсфорд парсонаге, анд оф ассистинг то форм а
      кууадрилле табле ат росингс, ин тхе абсенце оф море елигибле
      виситорс. тхе идеа соон реацхед то цонвицтион, ас схе обсервед
      хис инцреасинг цивилитиес тоуард херселф, анд хеард хис фрекууент
      аттемпт ат а цомплимент он хер уит анд вивациты; анд тхоугх море
      астонисхед тхан гратифиед херселф бы тхис еффецт оф хер цхармс,
      ит уас нот лонг бефоре хер мотхер гаве хер то ундерстанд тхат тхе
      пробабилиты оф тхеир марриаге уас екстремелы агрееабле то _хер_.
      елизабетх, хоуевер, дид нот цхоосе то таке тхе хинт, беинг уелл
      ауаре тхат а сериоус диспуте муст бе тхе цонсекууенце оф аны
      реплы. мр. цоллинс мигхт невер маке тхе оффер, анд тилл хе дид,
      ит уас уселесс то кууаррел абоут хим.

      иф тхере хад нот беен а нетхерфиелд балл то препаре фор анд талк
      оф, тхе ыоунгер мисс беннетс уоулд хаве беен ин а веры питиабле
      стате ат тхис тиме, фор фром тхе даы оф тхе инвитатион, то тхе
      даы оф тхе балл, тхере уас суцх а суццессион оф раин ас превентед
      тхеир уалкинг то мерытон онце. но аунт, но оффицерс, но неус
      цоулд бе соугхт афтер—тхе веры схое-росес фор нетхерфиелд уере
      гот бы проксы. евен елизабетх мигхт хаве фоунд соме триал оф хер
      патиенце ин уеатхер ухицх тоталлы суспендед тхе импровемент оф
      хер ацкууаинтанце уитх мр. уицкхам; анд нотхинг лесс тхан а данце
      он туесдаы, цоулд хаве маде суцх а фридаы, сатурдаы, сундаы, анд
      мондаы ендурабле то китты анд лыдиа.




      цхаптер 18

      тилл елизабетх ентеред тхе драуинг-роом ат нетхерфиелд, анд
      лоокед ин ваин фор мр. уицкхам амонг тхе цлустер оф ред цоатс
      тхере ассемблед, а доубт оф хис беинг пресент хад невер оццурред
      то хер. тхе цертаинты оф меетинг хим хад нот беен цхецкед бы аны
      оф тхосе рецоллецтионс тхат мигхт нот унреасонаблы хаве алармед
      хер. схе хад дрессед уитх море тхан усуал царе, анд препаред ин
      тхе хигхест спиритс фор тхе цонкууест оф алл тхат ремаинед
      унсубдуед оф хис хеарт, трустинг тхат ит уас нот море тхан мигхт
      бе уон ин тхе цоурсе оф тхе евенинг. бут ин ан инстант аросе тхе
      дреадфул суспицион оф хис беинг пурпоселы омиттед фор мр. дарцы’с
      плеасуре ин тхе бинглеыс’ инвитатион то тхе оффицерс; анд тхоугх
      тхис уас нот ексацтлы тхе цасе, тхе абсолуте фацт оф хис абсенце
      уас проноунцед бы хис фриенд денны, то ухом лыдиа еагерлы
      апплиед, анд ухо толд тхем тхат уицкхам хад беен облигед то го то
      тоун он бусинесс тхе даы бефоре, анд уас нот ыет ретурнед;
      аддинг, уитх а сигнифицант смиле, “и до нот имагине хис бусинесс
      уоулд хаве цаллед хим ауаы жуст ноу, иф хе хад нот уантед то
      авоид а цертаин гентлеман хере.”

      тхис парт оф хис интеллигенце, тхоугх унхеард бы лыдиа, уас
      цаугхт бы елизабетх, анд, ас ит ассуред хер тхат дарцы уас нот
      лесс ансуерабле фор уицкхам’с абсенце тхан иф хер фирст сурмисе
      хад беен жуст, еверы феелинг оф дисплеасуре агаинст тхе формер
      уас со схарпенед бы иммедиате дисаппоинтмент, тхат схе цоулд
      хардлы реплы уитх толерабле цивилиты то тхе полите инкууириес
      ухицх хе дирецтлы афтеруардс аппроацхед то маке. аттенданце,
      форбеаранце, патиенце уитх дарцы, уас инжуры то уицкхам. схе уас
      ресолвед агаинст аны сорт оф цонверсатион уитх хим, анд турнед
      ауаы уитх а дегрее оф илл-хумоур ухицх схе цоулд нот ухоллы
      сурмоунт евен ин спеакинг то мр. бинглеы, ухосе блинд партиалиты
      провокед хер.

      бут елизабетх уас нот формед фор илл-хумоур; анд тхоугх еверы
      проспецт оф хер оун уас дестроыед фор тхе евенинг, ит цоулд нот
      дуелл лонг он хер спиритс; анд хавинг толд алл хер гриефс то
      цхарлотте луцас, ухом схе хад нот сеен фор а уеек, схе уас соон
      абле то маке а волунтары транситион то тхе оддитиес оф хер
      цоусин, анд то поинт хим оут то хер партицулар нотице. тхе фирст
      туо данцес, хоуевер, броугхт а ретурн оф дистресс; тхеы уере
      данцес оф мортифицатион. мр. цоллинс, аукуард анд солемн,
      апологисинг инстеад оф аттендинг, анд офтен мовинг уронг уитхоут
      беинг ауаре оф ит, гаве хер алл тхе схаме анд мисеры ухицх а
      дисагрееабле партнер фор а цоупле оф данцес цан гиве. тхе момент
      оф хер релеасе фром хим уас ецстасы.

      схе данцед некст уитх ан оффицер, анд хад тхе рефресхмент оф
      талкинг оф уицкхам, анд оф хеаринг тхат хе уас универсаллы ликед.
      ухен тхосе данцес уере овер, схе ретурнед то цхарлотте луцас, анд
      уас ин цонверсатион уитх хер, ухен схе фоунд херселф судденлы
      аддрессед бы мр. дарцы ухо тоок хер со муцх бы сурприсе ин хис
      апплицатион фор хер ханд, тхат, уитхоут кноуинг ухат схе дид, схе
      аццептед хим. хе уалкед ауаы агаин иммедиателы, анд схе уас лефт
      то фрет овер хер оун уант оф пресенце оф минд; цхарлотте триед то
      цонсоле хер:

      “и даре саы ыоу уилл финд хим веры агрееабле.”

      “хеавен форбид! _тхат_ уоулд бе тхе греатест мисфортуне оф алл!
      то финд а ман агрееабле ухом оне ис детерминед то хате! до нот
      уисх ме суцх ан евил.”

      ухен тхе данцинг рецомменцед, хоуевер, анд дарцы аппроацхед то
      цлаим хер ханд, цхарлотте цоулд нот хелп цаутионинг хер ин а
      ухиспер, нот то бе а симплетон, анд аллоу хер фанцы фор уицкхам
      то маке хер аппеар унплеасант ин тхе еыес оф а ман тен тимес хис
      цонсекууенце. елизабетх маде но ансуер, анд тоок хер плаце ин тхе
      сет, амазед ат тхе дигниты то ухицх схе уас арривед ин беинг
      аллоуед то станд оппосите то мр. дарцы, анд реадинг ин хер
      неигхбоурс’ лоокс, тхеир екууал амаземент ин бехолдинг ит. тхеы
      стоод фор соме тиме уитхоут спеакинг а уорд; анд схе беган то
      имагине тхат тхеир силенце уас то ласт тхроугх тхе туо данцес,
      анд ат фирст уас ресолвед нот то бреак ит; тилл судденлы фанцыинг
      тхат ит уоулд бе тхе греатер пунисхмент то хер партнер то облиге
      хим то талк, схе маде соме слигхт обсерватион он тхе данце. хе
      реплиед, анд уас агаин силент. афтер а паусе оф соме минутес, схе
      аддрессед хим а сецонд тиме уитх:—“ит ис _ыоур_ турн то саы
      сометхинг ноу, мр. дарцы. _и_ талкед абоут тхе данце, анд _ыоу_
      оугхт то маке соме сорт оф ремарк он тхе сизе оф тхе роом, ор тхе
      нумбер оф цоуплес.”

      хе смилед, анд ассуред хер тхат ухатевер схе уисхед хим то саы
      схоулд бе саид.

      “веры уелл. тхат реплы уилл до фор тхе пресент. перхапс бы анд бы
      и маы обсерве тхат привате баллс аре муцх плеасантер тхан публиц
      онес. бут _ноу_ уе маы бе силент.”

      “до ыоу талк бы руле, тхен, ухиле ыоу аре данцинг?”

      “сометимес. оне муст спеак а литтле, ыоу кноу. ит уоулд лоок одд
      то бе ентирелы силент фор халф ан хоур тогетхер; анд ыет фор тхе
      адвантаге оф _соме_, цонверсатион оугхт то бе со аррангед, ас
      тхат тхеы маы хаве тхе троубле оф саыинг ас литтле ас поссибле.”

      “аре ыоу цонсултинг ыоур оун феелингс ин тхе пресент цасе, ор до
      ыоу имагине тхат ыоу аре гратифыинг мине?”

      “ботх,” реплиед елизабетх арцхлы; “фор и хаве алуаыс сеен а греат
      симилариты ин тхе турн оф оур миндс. уе аре еацх оф ан унсоциал,
      тацитурн диспоситион, унуиллинг то спеак, унлесс уе експецт то саы
      сометхинг тхат уилл амазе тхе ухоле роом, анд бе хандед доун то
      постериты уитх алл тхе _цлат_ оф а проверб.”

      “тхис ис но веры стрикинг ресембланце оф ыоур оун цхарацтер, и ам
      суре,” саид хе. “хоу неар ит маы бе то _мине_, и цаннот претенд
      то саы. _ыоу_ тхинк ит а фаитхфул портраит ундоубтедлы.”

      “и муст нот дециде он мы оун перформанце.”

      хе маде но ансуер, анд тхеы уере агаин силент тилл тхеы хад гоне
      доун тхе данце, ухен хе аскед хер иф схе анд хер систерс дид нот
      веры офтен уалк то мерытон. схе ансуеред ин тхе аффирмативе, анд,
      унабле то ресист тхе темптатион, аддед, “ухен ыоу мет ус тхере
      тхе отхер даы, уе хад жуст беен форминг а неу ацкууаинтанце.”

      тхе еффецт уас иммедиате. а деепер схаде оф _хаутеур_ оверспреад
      хис феатурес, бут хе саид нот а уорд, анд елизабетх, тхоугх
      бламинг херселф фор хер оун уеакнесс, цоулд нот го он. ат ленгтх
      дарцы споке, анд ин а цонстраинед маннер саид, “мр. уицкхам ис
      блессед уитх суцх хаппы маннерс ас маы енсуре хис _макинг_
      фриендс—ухетхер хе маы бе екууаллы цапабле оф _ретаининг_ тхем, ис
      лесс цертаин.”

      “хе хас беен со унлуцкы ас то лосе ыоур фриендсхип,” реплиед
      елизабетх уитх емпхасис, “анд ин а маннер ухицх хе ис ликелы то
      суффер фром алл хис лифе.”

      дарцы маде но ансуер, анд сеемед десироус оф цхангинг тхе
      субжецт. ат тхат момент, сир уиллиам луцас аппеаред цлосе то
      тхем, меанинг то пасс тхроугх тхе сет то тхе отхер сиде оф тхе
      роом; бут он перцеивинг мр. дарцы, хе стоппед уитх а боу оф
      супериор цоуртесы то цомплимент хим он хис данцинг анд хис
      партнер.

      “и хаве беен мост хигхлы гратифиед индеед, мы деар сир. суцх веры
      супериор данцинг ис нот офтен сеен. ит ис евидент тхат ыоу белонг
      то тхе фирст цирцлес. аллоу ме то саы, хоуевер, тхат ыоур фаир
      партнер доес нот дисграце ыоу, анд тхат и муст хопе то хаве тхис
      плеасуре офтен репеатед, еспециаллы ухен а цертаин десирабле
      евент, мы деар елиза (гланцинг ат хер систер анд бинглеы) схалл
      таке плаце. ухат цонгратулатионс уилл тхен флоу ин! и аппеал то
      мр. дарцы:—бут лет ме нот интеррупт ыоу, сир. ыоу уилл нот тханк
      ме фор детаининг ыоу фром тхе беуитцхинг цонверсе оф тхат ыоунг
      лады, ухосе бригхт еыес аре алсо упбраидинг ме.”

      тхе латтер парт оф тхис аддресс уас сцарцелы хеард бы дарцы; бут
      сир уиллиам’с аллусион то хис фриенд сеемед то стрике хим
      форциблы, анд хис еыес уере дирецтед уитх а веры сериоус
      експрессион тоуардс бинглеы анд жане, ухо уере данцинг тогетхер.
      рецоверинг химселф, хоуевер, схортлы, хе турнед то хис партнер,
      анд саид, “сир уиллиам’с интерруптион хас маде ме форгет ухат уе
      уере талкинг оф.”

      “и до нот тхинк уе уере спеакинг ат алл. сир уиллиам цоулд нот
      хаве интерруптед туо пеопле ин тхе роом ухо хад лесс то саы фор
      тхемселвес. уе хаве триед туо ор тхрее субжецтс алреады уитхоут
      суццесс, анд ухат уе аре то талк оф некст и цаннот имагине.”

      “ухат тхинк ыоу оф боокс?” саид хе, смилинг.

      “боокс—ох! но. и ам суре уе невер реад тхе саме, ор нот уитх тхе
      саме феелингс.”

      “и ам сорры ыоу тхинк со; бут иф тхат бе тхе цасе, тхере цан ат
      леаст бе но уант оф субжецт. уе маы цомпаре оур дифферент
      опинионс.”

      “но—и цаннот талк оф боокс ин а балл-роом; мы хеад ис алуаыс фулл
      оф сометхинг елсе.”

      “тхе _пресент_ алуаыс оццупиес ыоу ин суцх сценес—доес ит?” саид
      хе, уитх а лоок оф доубт.

      “ыес, алуаыс,” схе реплиед, уитхоут кноуинг ухат схе саид, фор
      хер тхоугхтс хад уандеред фар фром тхе субжецт, ас соон
      афтеруардс аппеаред бы хер судденлы ексцлаиминг, “и ремембер
      хеаринг ыоу онце саы, мр. дарцы, тхат ыоу хардлы евер форгаве,
      тхат ыоур ресентмент онце цреатед уас унаппеасабле. ыоу аре веры
      цаутиоус, и суппосе, ас то итс _беинг цреатед?_”

      “и ам,” саид хе, уитх а фирм воице.

      “анд невер аллоу ыоурселф то бе блиндед бы прежудице?”

      “и хопе нот.”

      “ит ис партицуларлы инцумбент он тхосе ухо невер цханге тхеир
      опинион, то бе сецуре оф жудгинг проперлы ат фирст.”

      “маы и аск то ухат тхесе кууестионс тенд?”

      “мерелы то тхе иллустратион оф _ыоур_ цхарацтер,” саид схе,
      ендеавоуринг то схаке офф хер гравиты. “и ам трыинг то маке ит
      оут.”

      “анд ухат ис ыоур суццесс?”

      схе схоок хер хеад. “и до нот гет он ат алл. и хеар суцх
      дифферент аццоунтс оф ыоу ас пуззле ме ексцеединглы.”

      “и цан реадилы белиеве,” ансуеред хе гравелы, “тхат репортс маы
      вары греатлы уитх респецт то ме; анд и цоулд уисх, мисс беннет,
      тхат ыоу уере нот то скетцх мы цхарацтер ат тхе пресент момент,
      ас тхере ис реасон то феар тхат тхе перформанце уоулд рефлецт но
      цредит он еитхер.”

      “бут иф и до нот таке ыоур ликенесс ноу, и маы невер хаве анотхер
      оппортуниты.”

      “и уоулд бы но меанс суспенд аны плеасуре оф ыоурс,” хе цолдлы
      реплиед. схе саид но море, анд тхеы уент доун тхе отхер данце анд
      партед ин силенце; анд он еацх сиде диссатисфиед, тхоугх нот то
      ан екууал дегрее, фор ин дарцы’с бреаст тхере уас а толераблы
      поуерфул феелинг тоуардс хер, ухицх соон процуред хер пардон, анд
      дирецтед алл хис ангер агаинст анотхер.

      тхеы хад нот лонг сепаратед, ухен мисс бинглеы цаме тоуардс хер,
      анд уитх ан експрессион оф цивил дисдаин аццостед хер:

      “со, мисс елиза, и хеар ыоу аре кууите делигхтед уитх георге
      уицкхам! ыоур систер хас беен талкинг то ме абоут хим, анд аскинг
      ме а тхоусанд кууестионс; анд и финд тхат тхе ыоунг ман кууите
      форгот то телл ыоу, амонг хис отхер цоммуницатион, тхат хе уас
      тхе сон оф олд уицкхам, тхе лате мр. дарцы’с стеуард. лет ме
      рецомменд ыоу, хоуевер, ас а фриенд, нот то гиве имплицит
      цонфиденце то алл хис ассертионс; фор ас то мр. дарцы’с усинг хим
      илл, ит ис перфецтлы фалсе; фор, он тхе цонтрары, хе хас алуаыс
      беен ремаркаблы кинд то хим, тхоугх георге уицкхам хас треатед
      мр. дарцы ин а мост инфамоус маннер. и до нот кноу тхе
      партицуларс, бут и кноу веры уелл тхат мр. дарцы ис нот ин тхе
      леаст то бламе, тхат хе цаннот беар то хеар георге уицкхам
      ментионед, анд тхат тхоугх мы бротхер тхоугхт тхат хе цоулд нот
      уелл авоид инцлудинг хим ин хис инвитатион то тхе оффицерс, хе
      уас ексцессивелы глад то финд тхат хе хад такен химселф оут оф тхе
      уаы. хис цоминг инто тхе цоунтры ат алл ис а мост инсолент тхинг,
      индеед, анд и уондер хоу хе цоулд пресуме то до ит. и питы ыоу,
      мисс елиза, фор тхис дисцоверы оф ыоур фавоурите’с гуилт; бут
      реаллы, цонсидеринг хис десцент, оне цоулд нот експецт муцх
      беттер.”

      “хис гуилт анд хис десцент аппеар бы ыоур аццоунт то бе тхе
      саме,” саид елизабетх ангрилы; “фор и хаве хеард ыоу аццусе хим
      оф нотхинг уорсе тхан оф беинг тхе сон оф мр. дарцы’с стеуард,
      анд оф _тхат_, и цан ассуре ыоу, хе информед ме химселф.”

      “и бег ыоур пардон,” реплиед мисс бинглеы, турнинг ауаы уитх а
      снеер. “ексцусе мы интерференце—ит уас киндлы меант.”

      “инсолент гирл!” саид елизабетх то херселф. “ыоу аре муцх
      мистакен иф ыоу експецт то инфлуенце ме бы суцх а палтры аттацк ас
      тхис. и сее нотхинг ин ит бут ыоур оун уилфул игноранце анд тхе
      малице оф мр. дарцы.” схе тхен соугхт хер елдест систер, ухо хад
      ундертакен то маке инкууириес он тхе саме субжецт оф бинглеы. жане
      мет хер уитх а смиле оф суцх суеет цомплаценцы, а глоу оф суцх
      хаппы експрессион, ас суффициентлы маркед хоу уелл схе уас
      сатисфиед уитх тхе оццурренцес оф тхе евенинг. елизабетх
      инстантлы реад хер феелингс, анд ат тхат момент солицитуде фор
      уицкхам, ресентмент агаинст хис енемиес, анд еверытхинг елсе,
      гаве уаы бефоре тхе хопе оф жане’с беинг ин тхе фаирест уаы фор
      хаппинесс.

      “и уант то кноу,” саид схе, уитх а цоунтенанце но лесс смилинг
      тхан хер систер’с, “ухат ыоу хаве леарнт абоут мр. уицкхам. бут
      перхапс ыоу хаве беен тоо плеасантлы енгагед то тхинк оф аны
      тхирд персон; ин ухицх цасе ыоу маы бе суре оф мы пардон.”

      “но,” реплиед жане, “и хаве нот форготтен хим; бут и хаве нотхинг
      сатисфацторы то телл ыоу. мр. бинглеы доес нот кноу тхе ухоле оф
      хис хисторы, анд ис кууите игнорант оф тхе цирцумстанцес ухицх
      хаве принципаллы оффендед мр. дарцы; бут хе уилл воуцх фор тхе
      гоод цондуцт, тхе пробиты, анд хоноур оф хис фриенд, анд ис
      перфецтлы цонвинцед тхат мр. уицкхам хас десервед муцх лесс
      аттентион фром мр. дарцы тхан хе хас рецеивед; анд и ам сорры то
      саы бы хис аццоунт ас уелл ас хис систер’с, мр. уицкхам ис бы но
      меанс а респецтабле ыоунг ман. и ам афраид хе хас беен веры
      импрудент, анд хас десервед то лосе мр. дарцы’с регард.”

      “мр. бинглеы доес нот кноу мр. уицкхам химселф?”

      “но; хе невер сау хим тилл тхе отхер морнинг ат мерытон.”

      “тхис аццоунт тхен ис ухат хе хас рецеивед фром мр. дарцы. и ам
      сатисфиед. бут ухат доес хе саы оф тхе ливинг?”

      “хе доес нот ексацтлы рецоллецт тхе цирцумстанцес, тхоугх хе хас
      хеард тхем фром мр. дарцы море тхан онце, бут хе белиевес тхат ит
      уас лефт то хим _цондитионаллы_ онлы.”

      “и хаве нот а доубт оф мр. бинглеы’с синцериты,” саид елизабетх
      уармлы; “бут ыоу муст ексцусе мы нот беинг цонвинцед бы ассуранцес
      онлы. мр. бинглеы’с дефенсе оф хис фриенд уас а веры абле оне, и
      даре саы; бут синце хе ис унацкууаинтед уитх северал партс оф тхе
      сторы, анд хас леарнт тхе рест фром тхат фриенд химселф, и схалл
      вентуре то стилл тхинк оф ботх гентлемен ас и дид бефоре.”

      схе тхен цхангед тхе дисцоурсе то оне море гратифыинг то еацх,
      анд он ухицх тхере цоулд бе но дифференце оф сентимент. елизабетх
      листенед уитх делигхт то тхе хаппы, тхоугх модест хопес ухицх
      жане ентертаинед оф мр. бинглеы’с регард, анд саид алл ин хер
      поуер то хеигхтен хер цонфиденце ин ит. он тхеир беинг жоинед бы
      мр. бинглеы химселф, елизабетх уитхдреу то мисс луцас; то ухосе
      инкууиры афтер тхе плеасантнесс оф хер ласт партнер схе хад
      сцарцелы реплиед, бефоре мр. цоллинс цаме уп то тхем, анд толд
      хер уитх греат ексултатион тхат хе хад жуст беен со фортунате ас
      то маке а мост импортант дисцоверы.

      “и хаве фоунд оут,” саид хе, “бы а сингулар аццидент, тхат тхере
      ис ноу ин тхе роом а неар релатион оф мы патронесс. и хаппенед то
      оверхеар тхе гентлеман химселф ментионинг то тхе ыоунг лады ухо
      доес тхе хоноурс оф тхе хоусе тхе намес оф хис цоусин мисс де
      боургх, анд оф хер мотхер лады цатхерине. хоу уондерфуллы тхесе
      сорт оф тхингс оццур! ухо уоулд хаве тхоугхт оф мы меетинг уитх,
      перхапс, а непхеу оф лады цатхерине де боургх ин тхис ассемблы! и
      ам мост тханкфул тхат тхе дисцоверы ис маде ин тиме фор ме то паы
      мы респецтс то хим, ухицх и ам ноу гоинг то до, анд труст хе уилл
      ексцусе мы нот хавинг доне ит бефоре. мы тотал игноранце оф тхе
      цоннецтион муст плеад мы апологы.”

      “ыоу аре нот гоинг то интродуце ыоурселф то мр. дарцы!”

      “индеед и ам. и схалл ентреат хис пардон фор нот хавинг доне ит
      еарлиер. и белиеве хим то бе лады цатхерине’с _непхеу_. ит уилл
      бе ин мы поуер то ассуре хим тхат хер ладысхип уас кууите уелл
      ыестердаы се’ннигхт.”

      елизабетх триед хард то диссуаде хим фром суцх а сцхеме, ассуринг
      хим тхат мр. дарцы уоулд цонсидер хис аддрессинг хим уитхоут
      интродуцтион ас ан импертинент фреедом, ратхер тхан а цомплимент
      то хис аунт; тхат ит уас нот ин тхе леаст нецессары тхере схоулд
      бе аны нотице он еитхер сиде; анд тхат иф ит уере, ит муст белонг
      то мр. дарцы, тхе супериор ин цонсекууенце, то бегин тхе
      ацкууаинтанце. мр. цоллинс листенед то хер уитх тхе детерминед аир
      оф фоллоуинг хис оун инцлинатион, анд, ухен схе цеасед спеакинг,
      реплиед тхус:

      “мы деар мисс елизабетх, и хаве тхе хигхест опинион ин тхе уорлд
      ин ыоур ексцеллент жудгемент ин алл маттерс уитхин тхе сцопе оф
      ыоур ундерстандинг; бут пермит ме то саы, тхат тхере муст бе а
      уиде дифференце бетуеен тхе естаблисхед формс оф церемоны амонгст
      тхе лаиты, анд тхосе ухицх регулате тхе цлергы; фор, гиве ме
      леаве то обсерве тхат и цонсидер тхе цлерицал оффице ас екууал ин
      поинт оф дигниты уитх тхе хигхест ранк ин тхе кингдом—провидед
      тхат а пропер хумилиты оф бехавиоур ис ат тхе саме тиме
      маинтаинед. ыоу муст тхерефоре аллоу ме то фоллоу тхе дицтатес оф
      мы цонсциенце он тхис оццасион, ухицх леадс ме то перформ ухат и
      лоок он ас а поинт оф дуты. пардон ме фор неглецтинг то профит бы
      ыоур адвице, ухицх он еверы отхер субжецт схалл бе мы цонстант
      гуиде, тхоугх ин тхе цасе бефоре ус и цонсидер мыселф море фиттед
      бы едуцатион анд хабитуал студы то дециде он ухат ис ригхт тхан а
      ыоунг лады лике ыоурселф.” анд уитх а лоу боу хе лефт хер то
      аттацк мр. дарцы, ухосе рецептион оф хис адванцес схе еагерлы
      уатцхед, анд ухосе астонисхмент ат беинг со аддрессед уас веры
      евидент. хер цоусин префацед хис спеецх уитх а солемн боу анд
      тхоугх схе цоулд нот хеар а уорд оф ит, схе фелт ас иф хеаринг ит
      алл, анд сау ин тхе мотион оф хис липс тхе уордс “апологы,”
      “хунсфорд,” анд “лады цатхерине де боургх.” ит вексед хер то сее
      хим експосе химселф то суцх а ман. мр. дарцы уас еыеинг хим уитх
      унрестраинед уондер, анд ухен ат ласт мр. цоллинс аллоуед хим
      тиме то спеак, реплиед уитх ан аир оф дистант цивилиты. мр.
      цоллинс, хоуевер, уас нот дисцоурагед фром спеакинг агаин, анд
      мр. дарцы’с цонтемпт сеемед абундантлы инцреасинг уитх тхе ленгтх
      оф хис сецонд спеецх, анд ат тхе енд оф ит хе онлы маде хим а
      слигхт боу, анд мовед анотхер уаы. мр. цоллинс тхен ретурнед то
      елизабетх.

      “и хаве но реасон, и ассуре ыоу,” саид хе, “то бе диссатисфиед
      уитх мы рецептион. мр. дарцы сеемед муцх плеасед уитх тхе
      аттентион. хе ансуеред ме уитх тхе утмост цивилиты, анд евен паид
      ме тхе цомплимент оф саыинг тхат хе уас со уелл цонвинцед оф лады
      цатхерине’с дисцернмент ас то бе цертаин схе цоулд невер бестоу а
      фавоур унуортхилы. ит уас реаллы а веры хандсоме тхоугхт. упон
      тхе ухоле, и ам муцх плеасед уитх хим.”

      ас елизабетх хад но лонгер аны интерест оф хер оун то пурсуе, схе
      турнед хер аттентион алмост ентирелы он хер систер анд мр.
      бинглеы; анд тхе траин оф агрееабле рефлецтионс ухицх хер
      обсерватионс гаве биртх то, маде хер перхапс алмост ас хаппы ас
      жане. схе сау хер ин идеа сеттлед ин тхат веры хоусе, ин алл тхе
      фелициты ухицх а марриаге оф труе аффецтион цоулд бестоу; анд схе
      фелт цапабле, ундер суцх цирцумстанцес, оф ендеавоуринг евен то
      лике бинглеы’с туо систерс. хер мотхер’с тхоугхтс схе плаинлы сау
      уере бент тхе саме уаы, анд схе детерминед нот то вентуре неар
      хер, лест схе мигхт хеар тоо муцх. ухен тхеы сат доун то суппер,
      тхерефоре, схе цонсидеред ит а мост унлуцкы перверсенесс ухицх
      плацед тхем уитхин оне оф еацх отхер; анд дееплы уас схе вексед то
      финд тхат хер мотхер уас талкинг то тхат оне персон (лады луцас)
      фреелы, опенлы, анд оф нотхинг елсе бут хер експецтатион тхат жане
      уоулд соон бе марриед то мр. бинглеы. ит уас ан аниматинг
      субжецт, анд мрс. беннет сеемед инцапабле оф фатигуе ухиле
      енумератинг тхе адвантагес оф тхе матцх. хис беинг суцх а
      цхарминг ыоунг ман, анд со рицх, анд ливинг бут тхрее милес фром
      тхем, уере тхе фирст поинтс оф селф-гратулатион; анд тхен ит уас
      суцх а цомфорт то тхинк хоу фонд тхе туо систерс уере оф жане,
      анд то бе цертаин тхат тхеы муст десире тхе цоннецтион ас муцх ас
      схе цоулд до. ит уас, мореовер, суцх а промисинг тхинг фор хер
      ыоунгер даугхтерс, ас жане’с маррыинг со греатлы муст тхроу тхем
      ин тхе уаы оф отхер рицх мен; анд ластлы, ит уас со плеасант ат
      хер тиме оф лифе то бе абле то цонсигн хер сингле даугхтерс то
      тхе царе оф тхеир систер, тхат схе мигхт нот бе облигед то го
      инто цомпаны море тхан схе ликед. ит уас нецессары то маке тхис
      цирцумстанце а маттер оф плеасуре, бецаусе он суцх оццасионс ит
      ис тхе етикууетте; бут но оне уас лесс ликелы тхан мрс. беннет то
      финд цомфорт ин стаыинг хоме ат аны период оф хер лифе. схе
      цонцлудед уитх маны гоод уисхес тхат лады луцас мигхт соон бе
      екууаллы фортунате, тхоугх евидентлы анд триумпхантлы белиевинг
      тхере уас но цханце оф ит.

      ин ваин дид елизабетх ендеавоур то цхецк тхе рапидиты оф хер
      мотхер’с уордс, ор персуаде хер то десцрибе хер фелициты ин а
      лесс аудибле ухиспер; фор, то хер инекспрессибле вексатион, схе
      цоулд перцеиве тхат тхе цхиеф оф ит уас оверхеард бы мр. дарцы,
      ухо сат оппосите то тхем. хер мотхер онлы сцолдед хер фор беинг
      нонсенсицал.

      “ухат ис мр. дарцы то ме, праы, тхат и схоулд бе афраид оф хим? и
      ам суре уе оуе хим но суцх партицулар цивилиты ас то бе облигед
      то саы нотхинг _хе_ маы нот лике то хеар.”

      “фор хеавен’с саке, мадам, спеак лоуер. ухат адвантаге цан ит бе
      фор ыоу то оффенд мр. дарцы? ыоу уилл невер рецомменд ыоурселф то
      хис фриенд бы со доинг!”

      нотхинг тхат схе цоулд саы, хоуевер, хад аны инфлуенце. хер
      мотхер уоулд талк оф хер виеус ин тхе саме интеллигибле тоне.
      елизабетх блусхед анд блусхед агаин уитх схаме анд вексатион. схе
      цоулд нот хелп фрекууентлы гланцинг хер еые ат мр. дарцы, тхоугх
      еверы гланце цонвинцед хер оф ухат схе дреадед; фор тхоугх хе уас
      нот алуаыс лоокинг ат хер мотхер, схе уас цонвинцед тхат хис
      аттентион уас инвариаблы фиксед бы хер. тхе експрессион оф хис фаце
      цхангед градуаллы фром индигнант цонтемпт то а цомпосед анд
      стеады гравиты.

      ат ленгтх, хоуевер, мрс. беннет хад но море то саы; анд лады
      луцас, ухо хад беен лонг ыаунинг ат тхе репетитион оф делигхтс
      ухицх схе сау но ликелихоод оф схаринг, уас лефт то тхе цомфортс
      оф цолд хам анд цхицкен. елизабетх ноу беган то ревиве. бут нот
      лонг уас тхе интервал оф транкууиллиты; фор, ухен суппер уас овер,
      сингинг уас талкед оф, анд схе хад тхе мортифицатион оф сееинг
      мары, афтер веры литтле ентреаты, препаринг то облиге тхе
      цомпаны. бы маны сигнифицант лоокс анд силент ентреатиес, дид схе
      ендеавоур то превент суцх а прооф оф цомплаисанце, бут ин ваин;
      мары уоулд нот ундерстанд тхем; суцх ан оппортуниты оф ексхибитинг
      уас делигхтфул то хер, анд схе беган хер сонг. елизабетх’с еыес
      уере фиксед он хер уитх мост паинфул сенсатионс, анд схе уатцхед
      хер прогресс тхроугх тхе северал станзас уитх ан импатиенце ухицх
      уас веры илл реуардед ат тхеир цлосе; фор мары, он рецеивинг,
      амонгст тхе тханкс оф тхе табле, тхе хинт оф а хопе тхат схе
      мигхт бе преваилед он то фавоур тхем агаин, афтер тхе паусе оф
      халф а минуте беган анотхер. мары’с поуерс уере бы но меанс
      фиттед фор суцх а дисплаы; хер воице уас уеак, анд хер маннер
      аффецтед. елизабетх уас ин агониес. схе лоокед ат жане, то сее
      хоу схе боре ит; бут жане уас веры цомпоседлы талкинг то бинглеы.
      схе лоокед ат хис туо систерс, анд сау тхем макинг сигнс оф
      дерисион ат еацх отхер, анд ат дарцы, ухо цонтинуед, хоуевер,
      импертурбаблы граве. схе лоокед ат хер фатхер то ентреат хис
      интерференце, лест мары схоулд бе сингинг алл нигхт. хе тоок тхе
      хинт, анд ухен мары хад финисхед хер сецонд сонг, саид алоуд,
      “тхат уилл до екстремелы уелл, цхилд. ыоу хаве делигхтед ус лонг
      еноугх. лет тхе отхер ыоунг ладиес хаве тиме то ексхибит.”

      мары, тхоугх претендинг нот то хеар, уас сомеухат дисцонцертед;
      анд елизабетх, сорры фор хер, анд сорры фор хер фатхер’с спеецх,
      уас афраид хер анксиеты хад доне но гоод. отхерс оф тхе парты уере
      ноу апплиед то.

      “иф и,” саид мр. цоллинс, “уере со фортунате ас то бе абле то
      синг, и схоулд хаве греат плеасуре, и ам суре, ин облигинг тхе
      цомпаны уитх ан аир; фор и цонсидер мусиц ас а веры инноцент
      диверсион, анд перфецтлы цомпатибле уитх тхе профессион оф а
      цлергыман. и до нот меан, хоуевер, то ассерт тхат уе цан бе
      жустифиед ин девотинг тоо муцх оф оур тиме то мусиц, фор тхере
      аре цертаинлы отхер тхингс то бе аттендед то. тхе рецтор оф а
      парисх хас муцх то до. ин тхе фирст плаце, хе муст маке суцх ан
      агреемент фор титхес ас маы бе бенефициал то химселф анд нот
      оффенсиве то хис патрон. хе муст урите хис оун сермонс; анд тхе
      тиме тхат ремаинс уилл нот бе тоо муцх фор хис парисх дутиес, анд
      тхе царе анд импровемент оф хис дуеллинг, ухицх хе цаннот бе
      ексцусед фром макинг ас цомфортабле ас поссибле. анд и до нот
      тхинк ит оф лигхт импортанце тхат хе схоулд хаве аттентиве анд
      цонцилиаторы маннерс тоуардс еверыбоды, еспециаллы тоуардс тхосе
      то ухом хе оуес хис префермент. и цаннот ацкууит хим оф тхат дуты;
      нор цоулд и тхинк уелл оф тхе ман ухо схоулд омит ан оццасион оф
      тестифыинг хис респецт тоуардс аныбоды цоннецтед уитх тхе
      фамилы.” анд уитх а боу то мр. дарцы, хе цонцлудед хис спеецх,
      ухицх хад беен спокен со лоуд ас то бе хеард бы халф тхе роом.
      маны старед—маны смилед; бут но оне лоокед море амусед тхан мр.
      беннет химселф, ухиле хис уифе сериоуслы цоммендед мр. цоллинс
      фор хавинг спокен со сенсиблы, анд обсервед ин а халф-ухиспер то
      лады луцас, тхат хе уас а ремаркаблы цлевер, гоод кинд оф ыоунг
      ман.

      то елизабетх ит аппеаред тхат, хад хер фамилы маде ан агреемент
      то експосе тхемселвес ас муцх ас тхеы цоулд дуринг тхе евенинг, ит
      уоулд хаве беен импоссибле фор тхем то плаы тхеир партс уитх море
      спирит ор финер суццесс; анд хаппы дид схе тхинк ит фор бинглеы
      анд хер систер тхат соме оф тхе ексхибитион хад есцапед хис
      нотице, анд тхат хис феелингс уере нот оф а сорт то бе муцх
      дистрессед бы тхе фоллы ухицх хе муст хаве уитнессед. тхат хис
      туо систерс анд мр. дарцы, хоуевер, схоулд хаве суцх ан
      оппортуниты оф ридицулинг хер релатионс, уас бад еноугх, анд схе
      цоулд нот детермине ухетхер тхе силент цонтемпт оф тхе гентлеман,
      ор тхе инсолент смилес оф тхе ладиес, уере море интолерабле.

      тхе рест оф тхе евенинг броугхт хер литтле амусемент. схе уас
      теасед бы мр. цоллинс, ухо цонтинуед мост персеверинглы бы хер
      сиде, анд тхоугх хе цоулд нот преваил он хер то данце уитх хим
      агаин, пут ит оут оф хер поуер то данце уитх отхерс. ин ваин дид
      схе ентреат хим то станд уп уитх сомебоды елсе, анд оффер то
      интродуце хим то аны ыоунг лады ин тхе роом. хе ассуред хер, тхат
      ас то данцинг, хе уас перфецтлы индифферент то ит; тхат хис цхиеф
      обжецт уас бы делицате аттентионс то рецомменд химселф то хер анд
      тхат хе схоулд тхерефоре маке а поинт оф ремаининг цлосе то хер
      тхе ухоле евенинг. тхере уас но аргуинг упон суцх а прожецт. схе
      оуед хер греатест релиеф то хер фриенд мисс луцас, ухо офтен
      жоинед тхем, анд гоод-натуредлы енгагед мр. цоллинс’с
      цонверсатион то херселф.

      схе уас ат леаст фрее фром тхе оффенсе оф мр. дарцы’с фуртхер
      нотице; тхоугх офтен стандинг уитхин а веры схорт дистанце оф
      хер, кууите дисенгагед, хе невер цаме неар еноугх то спеак. схе
      фелт ит то бе тхе пробабле цонсекууенце оф хер аллусионс то мр.
      уицкхам, анд режоицед ин ит.

      тхе лонгбоурн парты уере тхе ласт оф алл тхе цомпаны то департ,
      анд, бы а маноеувре оф мрс. беннет, хад то уаит фор тхеир
      царриаге а кууартер оф ан хоур афтер еверыбоды елсе уас гоне,
      ухицх гаве тхем тиме то сее хоу хеартилы тхеы уере уисхед ауаы бы
      соме оф тхе фамилы. мрс. хурст анд хер систер сцарцелы опенед
      тхеир моутхс, ексцепт то цомплаин оф фатигуе, анд уере евидентлы
      импатиент то хаве тхе хоусе то тхемселвес. тхеы репулсед еверы
      аттемпт оф мрс. беннет ат цонверсатион, анд бы со доинг тхреу а
      лангуор овер тхе ухоле парты, ухицх уас веры литтле релиевед бы
      тхе лонг спеецхес оф мр. цоллинс, ухо уас цомплиментинг мр.
      бинглеы анд хис систерс он тхе елеганце оф тхеир ентертаинмент,
      анд тхе хоспиталиты анд политенесс ухицх хад маркед тхеир
      бехавиоур то тхеир гуестс. дарцы саид нотхинг ат алл. мр. беннет,
      ин екууал силенце, уас енжоыинг тхе сцене. мр. бинглеы анд жане
      уере стандинг тогетхер, а литтле детацхед фром тхе рест, анд
      талкед онлы то еацх отхер. елизабетх пресервед ас стеады а
      силенце ас еитхер мрс. хурст ор мисс бинглеы; анд евен лыдиа уас
      тоо муцх фатигуед то уттер море тхан тхе оццасионал ексцламатион
      оф “лорд, хоу тиред и ам!” аццомпаниед бы а виолент ыаун.

      ухен ат ленгтх тхеы аросе то таке леаве, мрс. беннет уас мост
      прессинглы цивил ин хер хопе оф сееинг тхе ухоле фамилы соон ат
      лонгбоурн, анд аддрессед херселф еспециаллы то мр. бинглеы, то
      ассуре хим хоу хаппы хе уоулд маке тхем бы еатинг а фамилы диннер
      уитх тхем ат аны тиме, уитхоут тхе церемоны оф а формал
      инвитатион. бинглеы уас алл гратефул плеасуре, анд хе реадилы
      енгагед фор такинг тхе еарлиест оппортуниты оф уаитинг он хер,
      афтер хис ретурн фром лондон, ухитхер хе уас облигед то го тхе
      некст даы фор а схорт тиме.

      мрс. беннет уас перфецтлы сатисфиед, анд кууиттед тхе хоусе ундер
      тхе делигхтфул персуасион тхат, аллоуинг фор тхе нецессары
      препаратионс оф сеттлементс, неу царриагес, анд уеддинг цлотхес,
      схе схоулд ундоубтедлы сее хер даугхтер сеттлед ат нетхерфиелд ин
      тхе цоурсе оф тхрее ор фоур монтхс. оф хавинг анотхер даугхтер
      марриед то мр. цоллинс, схе тхоугхт уитх екууал цертаинты, анд
      уитх цонсидерабле, тхоугх нот екууал, плеасуре. елизабетх уас тхе
      леаст деар то хер оф алл хер цхилдрен; анд тхоугх тхе ман анд тхе
      матцх уере кууите гоод еноугх фор _хер_, тхе уортх оф еацх уас
      ецлипсед бы мр. бинглеы анд нетхерфиелд.




      цхаптер 19

      тхе некст даы опенед а неу сцене ат лонгбоурн. мр. цоллинс маде
      хис децларатион ин форм. хавинг ресолвед то до ит уитхоут лосс оф
      тиме, ас хис леаве оф абсенце екстендед онлы то тхе фоллоуинг
      сатурдаы, анд хавинг но феелингс оф диффиденце то маке ит
      дистрессинг то химселф евен ат тхе момент, хе сет абоут ит ин а
      веры ордерлы маннер, уитх алл тхе обсерванцес, ухицх хе суппосед
      а регулар парт оф тхе бусинесс. он финдинг мрс. беннет,
      елизабетх, анд оне оф тхе ыоунгер гирлс тогетхер, соон афтер
      бреакфаст, хе аддрессед тхе мотхер ин тхесе уордс:

      “маы и хопе, мадам, фор ыоур интерест уитх ыоур фаир даугхтер
      елизабетх, ухен и солицит фор тхе хоноур оф а привате аудиенце
      уитх хер ин тхе цоурсе оф тхис морнинг?”

      бефоре елизабетх хад тиме фор анытхинг бут а блусх оф сурприсе,
      мрс. беннет ансуеред инстантлы, “ох деар!—ыес—цертаинлы. и ам
      суре лиззы уилл бе веры хаппы—и ам суре схе цан хаве но
      обжецтион. цоме, китты, и уант ыоу уп стаирс.” анд, гатхеринг хер
      уорк тогетхер, схе уас хастенинг ауаы, ухен елизабетх цаллед оут:

      “деар мадам, до нот го. и бег ыоу уилл нот го. мр. цоллинс муст
      ексцусе ме. хе цан хаве нотхинг то саы то ме тхат аныбоды неед нот
      хеар. и ам гоинг ауаы мыселф.”

      “но, но, нонсенсе, лиззы. и десире ыоу то стаы ухере ыоу аре.”
      анд упон елизабетх’с сееминг реаллы, уитх вексед анд ембаррассед
      лоокс, абоут то есцапе, схе аддед: “лиззы, и _инсист_ упон ыоур
      стаыинг анд хеаринг мр. цоллинс.”

      елизабетх уоулд нот оппосе суцх ан инжунцтион—анд а момент’с
      цонсидератион макинг хер алсо сенсибле тхат ит уоулд бе уисест то
      гет ит овер ас соон анд ас кууиетлы ас поссибле, схе сат доун
      агаин анд триед то цонцеал, бы инцессант емплоымент тхе феелингс
      ухицх уере дивидед бетуеен дистресс анд диверсион. мрс. беннет
      анд китты уалкед офф, анд ас соон ас тхеы уере гоне, мр. цоллинс
      беган.

      “белиеве ме, мы деар мисс елизабетх, тхат ыоур модесты, со фар
      фром доинг ыоу аны диссервице, ратхер аддс то ыоур отхер
      перфецтионс. ыоу уоулд хаве беен лесс амиабле ин мы еыес хад
      тхере _нот_ беен тхис литтле унуиллингнесс; бут аллоу ме то
      ассуре ыоу, тхат и хаве ыоур респецтед мотхер’с пермиссион фор
      тхис аддресс. ыоу цан хардлы доубт тхе пурпорт оф мы дисцоурсе,
      хоуевер ыоур натурал делицацы маы леад ыоу то диссембле; мы
      аттентионс хаве беен тоо маркед то бе мистакен. алмост ас соон ас
      и ентеред тхе хоусе, и синглед ыоу оут ас тхе цомпанион оф мы
      футуре лифе. бут бефоре и ам рун ауаы уитх бы мы феелингс он тхис
      субжецт, перхапс ит уоулд бе адвисабле фор ме то стате мы реасонс
      фор маррыинг—анд, мореовер, фор цоминг инто хертфордсхире уитх
      тхе десигн оф селецтинг а уифе, ас и цертаинлы дид.”

      тхе идеа оф мр. цоллинс, уитх алл хис солемн цомпосуре, беинг рун
      ауаы уитх бы хис феелингс, маде елизабетх со неар лаугхинг, тхат
      схе цоулд нот усе тхе схорт паусе хе аллоуед ин аны аттемпт то
      стоп хим фуртхер, анд хе цонтинуед:

      “мы реасонс фор маррыинг аре, фирст, тхат и тхинк ит а ригхт
      тхинг фор еверы цлергыман ин еасы цирцумстанцес (лике мыселф) то
      сет тхе ексампле оф матримоны ин хис парисх; сецондлы, тхат и ам
      цонвинцед тхат ит уилл адд веры греатлы то мы хаппинесс; анд
      тхирдлы—ухицх перхапс и оугхт то хаве ментионед еарлиер, тхат ит
      ис тхе партицулар адвице анд рецоммендатион оф тхе веры нобле
      лады ухом и хаве тхе хоноур оф цаллинг патронесс. туице хас схе
      цондесцендед то гиве ме хер опинион (унаскед тоо!) он тхис
      субжецт; анд ит уас бут тхе веры сатурдаы нигхт бефоре и лефт
      хунсфорд—бетуеен оур поолс ат кууадрилле, ухиле мрс. женкинсон уас
      аррангинг мисс де боургх’с фоотстоол, тхат схе саид, ‘мр.
      цоллинс, ыоу муст марры. а цлергыман лике ыоу муст марры. цхоосе
      проперлы, цхоосе а гентлеуоман фор _мы_ саке; анд фор ыоур _оун_,
      лет хер бе ан ацтиве, усефул сорт оф персон, нот броугхт уп хигх,
      бут абле то маке а смалл инцоме го а гоод уаы. тхис ис мы адвице.
      финд суцх а уоман ас соон ас ыоу цан, бринг хер то хунсфорд, анд
      и уилл висит хер.’ аллоу ме, бы тхе уаы, то обсерве, мы фаир
      цоусин, тхат и до нот рецкон тхе нотице анд кинднесс оф лады
      цатхерине де боургх ас амонг тхе леаст оф тхе адвантагес ин мы
      поуер то оффер. ыоу уилл финд хер маннерс беыонд анытхинг и цан
      десцрибе; анд ыоур уит анд вивациты, и тхинк, муст бе аццептабле
      то хер, еспециаллы ухен темперед уитх тхе силенце анд респецт
      ухицх хер ранк уилл иневитаблы ексците. тхус муцх фор мы генерал
      интентион ин фавоур оф матримоны; ит ремаинс то бе толд ухы мы
      виеус уере дирецтед тоуардс лонгбоурн инстеад оф мы оун
      неигхбоурхоод, ухере и цан ассуре ыоу тхере аре маны амиабле
      ыоунг уомен. бут тхе фацт ис, тхат беинг, ас и ам, то инхерит
      тхис естате афтер тхе деатх оф ыоур хоноуред фатхер (ухо,
      хоуевер, маы ливе маны ыеарс лонгер), и цоулд нот сатисфы мыселф
      уитхоут ресолвинг то цхоосе а уифе фром амонг хис даугхтерс, тхат
      тхе лосс то тхем мигхт бе ас литтле ас поссибле, ухен тхе
      меланцхолы евент такес плаце—ухицх, хоуевер, ас и хаве алреады
      саид, маы нот бе фор северал ыеарс. тхис хас беен мы мотиве, мы
      фаир цоусин, анд и флаттер мыселф ит уилл нот синк ме ин ыоур
      естеем. анд ноу нотхинг ремаинс фор ме бут то ассуре ыоу ин тхе
      мост аниматед лангуаге оф тхе виоленце оф мы аффецтион. то
      фортуне и ам перфецтлы индифферент, анд схалл маке но деманд оф
      тхат натуре он ыоур фатхер, синце и ам уелл ауаре тхат ит цоулд
      нот бе цомплиед уитх; анд тхат оне тхоусанд поундс ин тхе фоур
      пер центс, ухицх уилл нот бе ыоурс тилл афтер ыоур мотхер’с
      децеасе, ис алл тхат ыоу маы евер бе ентитлед то. он тхат хеад,
      тхерефоре, и схалл бе униформлы силент; анд ыоу маы ассуре
      ыоурселф тхат но унгенероус репроацх схалл евер пасс мы липс ухен
      уе аре марриед.”

      ит уас абсолутелы нецессары то интеррупт хим ноу.

      “ыоу аре тоо хасты, сир,” схе цриед. “ыоу форгет тхат и хаве маде
      но ансуер. лет ме до ит уитхоут фуртхер лосс оф тиме. аццепт мы
      тханкс фор тхе цомплимент ыоу аре паыинг ме. и ам веры сенсибле
      оф тхе хоноур оф ыоур пропосалс, бут ит ис импоссибле фор ме то
      до отхеруисе тхан то децлине тхем.”

      “и ам нот ноу то леарн,” реплиед мр. цоллинс, уитх а формал уаве
      оф тхе ханд, “тхат ит ис усуал уитх ыоунг ладиес то режецт тхе
      аддрессес оф тхе ман ухом тхеы сецретлы меан то аццепт, ухен хе
      фирст апплиес фор тхеир фавоур; анд тхат сометимес тхе рефусал ис
      репеатед а сецонд, ор евен а тхирд тиме. и ам тхерефоре бы но
      меанс дисцоурагед бы ухат ыоу хаве жуст саид, анд схалл хопе то
      леад ыоу то тхе алтар ере лонг.”

      “упон мы уорд, сир,” цриед елизабетх, “ыоур хопе ис а ратхер
      екстраординары оне афтер мы децларатион. и до ассуре ыоу тхат и ам
      нот оне оф тхосе ыоунг ладиес (иф суцх ыоунг ладиес тхере аре)
      ухо аре со даринг ас то риск тхеир хаппинесс он тхе цханце оф
      беинг аскед а сецонд тиме. и ам перфецтлы сериоус ин мы рефусал.
      ыоу цоулд нот маке _ме_ хаппы, анд и ам цонвинцед тхат и ам тхе
      ласт уоман ин тхе уорлд ухо цоулд маке ыоу со. наы, уере ыоур
      фриенд лады цатхерине то кноу ме, и ам персуадед схе уоулд финд
      ме ин еверы респецт илл кууалифиед фор тхе ситуатион.”

      “уере ит цертаин тхат лады цатхерине уоулд тхинк со,” саид мр.
      цоллинс веры гравелы—“бут и цаннот имагине тхат хер ладысхип
      уоулд ат алл дисаппрове оф ыоу. анд ыоу маы бе цертаин ухен и
      хаве тхе хоноур оф сееинг хер агаин, и схалл спеак ин тхе веры
      хигхест термс оф ыоур модесты, ецономы, анд отхер амиабле
      кууалифицатион.”

      “индеед, мр. цоллинс, алл праисе оф ме уилл бе уннецессары. ыоу
      муст гиве ме леаве то жудге фор мыселф, анд паы ме тхе цомплимент
      оф белиевинг ухат и саы. и уисх ыоу веры хаппы анд веры рицх, анд
      бы рефусинг ыоур ханд, до алл ин мы поуер то превент ыоур беинг
      отхеруисе. ин макинг ме тхе оффер, ыоу муст хаве сатисфиед тхе
      делицацы оф ыоур феелингс уитх регард то мы фамилы, анд маы таке
      поссессион оф лонгбоурн естате ухеневер ит фаллс, уитхоут аны
      селф-репроацх. тхис маттер маы бе цонсидеред, тхерефоре, ас
      финаллы сеттлед.” анд рисинг ас схе тхус споке, схе уоулд хаве
      кууиттед тхе роом, хад мр. цоллинс нот тхус аддрессед хер:

      “ухен и до мыселф тхе хоноур оф спеакинг то ыоу некст он тхе
      субжецт, и схалл хопе то рецеиве а море фавоурабле ансуер тхан
      ыоу хаве ноу гивен ме; тхоугх и ам фар фром аццусинг ыоу оф
      цруелты ат пресент, бецаусе и кноу ит то бе тхе естаблисхед
      цустом оф ыоур секс то режецт а ман он тхе фирст апплицатион, анд
      перхапс ыоу хаве евен ноу саид ас муцх то енцоураге мы суит ас
      уоулд бе цонсистент уитх тхе труе делицацы оф тхе фемале
      цхарацтер.”

      “реаллы, мр. цоллинс,” цриед елизабетх уитх соме уармтх, “ыоу
      пуззле ме ексцеединглы. иф ухат и хаве хитхерто саид цан аппеар то
      ыоу ин тхе форм оф енцоурагемент, и кноу нот хоу то експресс мы
      рефусал ин суцх а уаы ас то цонвинце ыоу оф итс беинг оне.”

      “ыоу муст гиве ме леаве то флаттер мыселф, мы деар цоусин, тхат
      ыоур рефусал оф мы аддрессес ис мерелы уордс оф цоурсе. мы
      реасонс фор белиевинг ит аре бриефлы тхесе: ит доес нот аппеар то
      ме тхат мы ханд ис унуортхы оф ыоур аццептанце, ор тхат тхе
      естаблисхмент и цан оффер уоулд бе аны отхер тхан хигхлы
      десирабле. мы ситуатион ин лифе, мы цоннецтионс уитх тхе фамилы
      оф де боургх, анд мы релатионсхип то ыоур оун, аре цирцумстанцес
      хигхлы ин мы фавоур; анд ыоу схоулд таке ит инто фуртхер
      цонсидератион, тхат ин спите оф ыоур манифолд аттрацтионс, ит ис
      бы но меанс цертаин тхат анотхер оффер оф марриаге маы евер бе
      маде ыоу. ыоур портион ис унхаппилы со смалл тхат ит уилл ин алл
      ликелихоод ундо тхе еффецтс оф ыоур ловелинесс анд амиабле
      кууалифицатионс. ас и муст тхерефоре цонцлуде тхат ыоу аре нот
      сериоус ин ыоур режецтион оф ме, и схалл цхоосе то аттрибуте ит
      то ыоур уисх оф инцреасинг мы лове бы суспенсе, аццординг то тхе
      усуал працтице оф елегант фемалес.”

      “и до ассуре ыоу, сир, тхат и хаве но претенсионс ухатевер то
      тхат кинд оф елеганце ухицх цонсистс ин торментинг а респецтабле
      ман. и уоулд ратхер бе паид тхе цомплимент оф беинг белиевед
      синцере. и тханк ыоу агаин анд агаин фор тхе хоноур ыоу хаве доне
      ме ин ыоур пропосалс, бут то аццепт тхем ис абсолутелы
      импоссибле. мы феелингс ин еверы респецт форбид ит. цан и спеак
      плаинер? до нот цонсидер ме ноу ас ан елегант фемале, интендинг
      то плагуе ыоу, бут ас а ратионал цреатуре, спеакинг тхе трутх
      фром хер хеарт.”

      “ыоу аре униформлы цхарминг!” цриед хе, уитх ан аир оф аукуард
      галлантры; “анд и ам персуадед тхат ухен санцтионед бы тхе
      експресс аутхориты оф ботх ыоур ексцеллент парентс, мы пропосалс
      уилл нот фаил оф беинг аццептабле.”

      то суцх персеверанце ин уилфул селф-децептион елизабетх уоулд
      маке но реплы, анд иммедиателы анд ин силенце уитхдреу;
      детерминед, иф хе персистед ин цонсидеринг хер репеатед рефусалс
      ас флаттеринг енцоурагемент, то апплы то хер фатхер, ухосе
      негативе мигхт бе уттеред ин суцх а маннер ас то бе децисиве, анд
      ухосе бехавиоур ат леаст цоулд нот бе мистакен фор тхе
      аффецтатион анд цокууетры оф ан елегант фемале.




      цхаптер 20

      мр. цоллинс уас нот лефт лонг то тхе силент цонтемплатион оф хис
      суццессфул лове; фор мрс. беннет, хавинг даудлед абоут ин тхе
      вестибуле то уатцх фор тхе енд оф тхе цонференце, но соонер сау
      елизабетх опен тхе доор анд уитх кууицк степ пасс хер тоуардс тхе
      стаирцасе, тхан схе ентеред тхе бреакфаст-роом, анд цонгратулатед
      ботх хим анд херселф ин уарм термс он тхе хаппы проспецт оф тхеир
      неарер цоннецтион. мр. цоллинс рецеивед анд ретурнед тхесе
      фелицитатионс уитх екууал плеасуре, анд тхен процеедед то релате
      тхе партицуларс оф тхеир интервиеу, уитх тхе ресулт оф ухицх хе
      трустед хе хад еверы реасон то бе сатисфиед, синце тхе рефусал
      ухицх хис цоусин хад стеадфастлы гивен хим уоулд натураллы флоу
      фром хер басхфул модесты анд тхе генуине делицацы оф хер
      цхарацтер.

      тхис информатион, хоуевер, стартлед мрс. беннет; схе уоулд хаве
      беен глад то бе екууаллы сатисфиед тхат хер даугхтер хад меант то
      енцоураге хим бы протестинг агаинст хис пропосалс, бут схе даред
      нот белиеве ит, анд цоулд нот хелп саыинг со.

      “бут, депенд упон ит, мр. цоллинс,” схе аддед, “тхат лиззы схалл
      бе броугхт то реасон. и уилл спеак то хер абоут ит дирецтлы. схе
      ис а веры хеадстронг, фоолисх гирл, анд доес нот кноу хер оун
      интерест бут и уилл _маке_ хер кноу ит.”

      “пардон ме фор интерруптинг ыоу, мадам,” цриед мр. цоллинс; “бут
      иф схе ис реаллы хеадстронг анд фоолисх, и кноу нот ухетхер схе
      уоулд алтогетхер бе а веры десирабле уифе то а ман ин мы
      ситуатион, ухо натураллы лоокс фор хаппинесс ин тхе марриаге
      стате. иф тхерефоре схе ацтуаллы персистс ин режецтинг мы суит,
      перхапс ит уере беттер нот то форце хер инто аццептинг ме,
      бецаусе иф лиабле то суцх дефецтс оф темпер, схе цоулд нот
      цонтрибуте муцх то мы фелициты.”

      “сир, ыоу кууите мисундерстанд ме,” саид мрс. беннет, алармед.
      “лиззы ис онлы хеадстронг ин суцх маттерс ас тхесе. ин еверытхинг
      елсе схе ис ас гоод-натуред а гирл ас евер ливед. и уилл го
      дирецтлы то мр. беннет, анд уе схалл веры соон сеттле ит уитх
      хер, и ам суре.”

      схе уоулд нот гиве хим тиме то реплы, бут хуррыинг инстантлы то
      хер хусбанд, цаллед оут ас схе ентеред тхе либрары, “ох! мр.
      беннет, ыоу аре уантед иммедиателы; уе аре алл ин ан упроар. ыоу
      муст цоме анд маке лиззы марры мр. цоллинс, фор схе воус схе уилл
      нот хаве хим, анд иф ыоу до нот маке хасте хе уилл цханге хис
      минд анд нот хаве _хер_.”

      мр. беннет раисед хис еыес фром хис боок ас схе ентеред, анд
      фиксед тхем он хер фаце уитх а цалм унцонцерн ухицх уас нот ин тхе
      леаст алтеред бы хер цоммуницатион.

      “и хаве нот тхе плеасуре оф ундерстандинг ыоу,” саид хе, ухен схе
      хад финисхед хер спеецх. “оф ухат аре ыоу талкинг?”

      “оф мр. цоллинс анд лиззы. лиззы децларес схе уилл нот хаве мр.
      цоллинс, анд мр. цоллинс бегинс то саы тхат хе уилл нот хаве
      лиззы.”

      “анд ухат ам и то до он тхе оццасион? ит сеемс ан хопелесс
      бусинесс.”

      “спеак то лиззы абоут ит ыоурселф. телл хер тхат ыоу инсист упон
      хер маррыинг хим.”

      “лет хер бе цаллед доун. схе схалл хеар мы опинион.”

      мрс. беннет ранг тхе белл, анд мисс елизабетх уас суммонед то тхе
      либрары.

      “цоме хере, цхилд,” цриед хер фатхер ас схе аппеаред. “и хаве
      сент фор ыоу он ан аффаир оф импортанце. и ундерстанд тхат мр.
      цоллинс хас маде ыоу ан оффер оф марриаге. ис ит труе?” елизабетх
      реплиед тхат ит уас. “веры уелл—анд тхис оффер оф марриаге ыоу
      хаве рефусед?”

      “и хаве, сир.”

      “веры уелл. уе ноу цоме то тхе поинт. ыоур мотхер инсистс упон
      ыоур аццептинг ит. ис ит нот со, мрс. беннет?”

      “ыес, ор и уилл невер сее хер агаин.”

      “ан унхаппы алтернативе ис бефоре ыоу, елизабетх. фром тхис даы
      ыоу муст бе а странгер то оне оф ыоур парентс. ыоур мотхер уилл
      невер сее ыоу агаин иф ыоу до _нот_ марры мр. цоллинс, анд и уилл
      невер сее ыоу агаин иф ыоу _до_.”

      елизабетх цоулд нот бут смиле ат суцх а цонцлусион оф суцх а
      бегиннинг, бут мрс. беннет, ухо хад персуадед херселф тхат хер
      хусбанд регардед тхе аффаир ас схе уисхед, уас ексцессивелы
      дисаппоинтед.

      “ухат до ыоу меан, мр. беннет, ин талкинг тхис уаы? ыоу промисед
      ме то _инсист_ упон хер маррыинг хим.”

      “мы деар,” реплиед хер хусбанд, “и хаве туо смалл фавоурс то
      рекууест. фирст, тхат ыоу уилл аллоу ме тхе фрее усе оф мы
      ундерстандинг он тхе пресент оццасион; анд сецондлы, оф мы роом.
      и схалл бе глад то хаве тхе либрары то мыселф ас соон ас маы бе.”

      нот ыет, хоуевер, ин спите оф хер дисаппоинтмент ин хер хусбанд,
      дид мрс. беннет гиве уп тхе поинт. схе талкед то елизабетх агаин
      анд агаин; цоаксед анд тхреатенед хер бы турнс. схе ендеавоуред то
      сецуре жане ин хер интерест; бут жане, уитх алл поссибле
      милднесс, децлинед интерферинг; анд елизабетх, сометимес уитх
      реал еарнестнесс, анд сометимес уитх плаыфул гаиеты, реплиед то
      хер аттацкс. тхоугх хер маннер вариед, хоуевер, хер детерминатион
      невер дид.

      мр. цоллинс, меанухиле, уас медитатинг ин солитуде он ухат хад
      пассед. хе тхоугхт тоо уелл оф химселф то цомпрехенд он ухат
      мотивес хис цоусин цоулд рефусе хим; анд тхоугх хис приде уас
      хурт, хе суфферед ин но отхер уаы. хис регард фор хер уас кууите
      имагинары; анд тхе поссибилиты оф хер десервинг хер мотхер’с
      репроацх превентед хис феелинг аны регрет.

      ухиле тхе фамилы уере ин тхис цонфусион, цхарлотте луцас цаме то
      спенд тхе даы уитх тхем. схе уас мет ин тхе вестибуле бы лыдиа,
      ухо, флыинг то хер, цриед ин а халф ухиспер, “и ам глад ыоу аре
      цоме, фор тхере ис суцх фун хере! ухат до ыоу тхинк хас хаппенед
      тхис морнинг? мр. цоллинс хас маде ан оффер то лиззы, анд схе
      уилл нот хаве хим.”

      цхарлотте хардлы хад тиме то ансуер, бефоре тхеы уере жоинед бы
      китты, ухо цаме то телл тхе саме неус; анд но соонер хад тхеы
      ентеред тхе бреакфаст-роом, ухере мрс. беннет уас алоне, тхан схе
      ликеуисе беган он тхе субжецт, цаллинг он мисс луцас фор хер
      цомпассион, анд ентреатинг хер то персуаде хер фриенд лиззы то
      цомплы уитх тхе уисхес оф алл хер фамилы. “праы до, мы деар мисс
      луцас,” схе аддед ин а меланцхолы тоне, “фор нободы ис он мы
      сиде, нободы такес парт уитх ме. и ам цруеллы усед, нободы феелс
      фор мы поор нервес.”

      цхарлотте’с реплы уас спаред бы тхе ентранце оф жане анд
      елизабетх.

      “аые, тхере схе цомес,” цонтинуед мрс. беннет, “лоокинг ас
      унцонцернед ас маы бе, анд царинг но море фор ус тхан иф уе уере
      ат ыорк, провидед схе цан хаве хер оун уаы. бут и телл ыоу, мисс
      лиззы—иф ыоу таке ит инто ыоур хеад то го он рефусинг еверы оффер
      оф марриаге ин тхис уаы, ыоу уилл невер гет а хусбанд ат алл—анд
      и ам суре и до нот кноу ухо ис то маинтаин ыоу ухен ыоур фатхер
      ис деад. _и_ схалл нот бе абле то кееп ыоу—анд со и уарн ыоу. и
      хаве доне уитх ыоу фром тхис веры даы. и толд ыоу ин тхе либрары,
      ыоу кноу, тхат и схоулд невер спеак то ыоу агаин, анд ыоу уилл
      финд ме ас гоод ас мы уорд. и хаве но плеасуре ин талкинг то
      ундутифул цхилдрен. нот тхат и хаве муцх плеасуре, индеед, ин
      талкинг то аныбоды. пеопле ухо суффер ас и до фром нервоус
      цомплаинтс цан хаве но греат инцлинатион фор талкинг. нободы цан
      телл ухат и суффер! бут ит ис алуаыс со. тхосе ухо до нот
      цомплаин аре невер питиед.”

      хер даугхтерс листенед ин силенце то тхис еффусион, сенсибле тхат
      аны аттемпт то реасон уитх хер ор соотхе хер уоулд онлы инцреасе
      тхе ирритатион. схе талкед он, тхерефоре, уитхоут интерруптион
      фром аны оф тхем, тилл тхеы уере жоинед бы мр. цоллинс, ухо
      ентеред тхе роом уитх ан аир море стателы тхан усуал, анд он
      перцеивинг ухом, схе саид то тхе гирлс, “ноу, и до инсист упон
      ит, тхат ыоу, алл оф ыоу, холд ыоур тонгуес, анд лет ме анд мр.
      цоллинс хаве а литтле цонверсатион тогетхер.”

      елизабетх пассед кууиетлы оут оф тхе роом, жане анд китты
      фоллоуед, бут лыдиа стоод хер гроунд, детерминед то хеар алл схе
      цоулд; анд цхарлотте, детаинед фирст бы тхе цивилиты оф мр.
      цоллинс, ухосе инкууириес афтер херселф анд алл хер фамилы уере
      веры минуте, анд тхен бы а литтле цуриоситы, сатисфиед херселф
      уитх уалкинг то тхе уиндоу анд претендинг нот то хеар. ин а
      долефул воице мрс. беннет беган тхе прожецтед цонверсатион: “ох!
      мр. цоллинс!”

      “мы деар мадам,” реплиед хе, “лет ус бе фор евер силент он тхис
      поинт. фар бе ит фром ме,” хе пресентлы цонтинуед, ин а воице
      тхат маркед хис дисплеасуре, “то ресент тхе бехавиоур оф ыоур
      даугхтер. ресигнатион то иневитабле евилс ис тхе дуты оф ус алл;
      тхе пецулиар дуты оф а ыоунг ман ухо хас беен со фортунате ас и
      хаве беен ин еарлы префермент; анд и труст и ам ресигнед. перхапс
      нот тхе лесс со фром феелинг а доубт оф мы поситиве хаппинесс хад
      мы фаир цоусин хоноуред ме уитх хер ханд; фор и хаве офтен
      обсервед тхат ресигнатион ис невер со перфецт ас ухен тхе
      блессинг дениед бегинс то лосе сомеухат оф итс валуе ин оур
      естиматион. ыоу уилл нот, и хопе, цонсидер ме ас схоуинг аны
      дисреспецт то ыоур фамилы, мы деар мадам, бы тхус уитхдрауинг мы
      претенсионс то ыоур даугхтер’с фавоур, уитхоут хавинг паид
      ыоурселф анд мр. беннет тхе цомплимент оф рекууестинг ыоу то
      интерпосе ыоур аутхориты ин мы бехалф. мы цондуцт маы, и феар, бе
      обжецтионабле ин хавинг аццептед мы дисмиссион фром ыоур
      даугхтер’с липс инстеад оф ыоур оун. бут уе аре алл лиабле то
      еррор. и хаве цертаинлы меант уелл тхроугх тхе ухоле аффаир. мы
      обжецт хас беен то сецуре ан амиабле цомпанион фор мыселф, уитх
      дуе цонсидератион фор тхе адвантаге оф алл ыоур фамилы, анд иф мы
      _маннер_ хас беен ат алл репрехенсибле, и хере бег леаве то
      апологисе.”




      цхаптер 21

      тхе дисцуссион оф мр. цоллинс’с оффер уас ноу неарлы ат ан енд,
      анд елизабетх хад онлы то суффер фром тхе унцомфортабле феелингс
      нецессарилы аттендинг ит, анд оццасионаллы фром соме пеевисх
      аллусионс оф хер мотхер. ас фор тхе гентлеман химселф, _хис_
      феелингс уере цхиефлы експрессед, нот бы ембаррассмент ор
      дежецтион, ор бы трыинг то авоид хер, бут бы стиффнесс оф маннер
      анд ресентфул силенце. хе сцарцелы евер споке то хер, анд тхе
      ассидуоус аттентионс ухицх хе хад беен со сенсибле оф химселф
      уере трансферред фор тхе рест оф тхе даы то мисс луцас, ухосе
      цивилиты ин листенинг то хим уас а сеасонабле релиеф то тхем алл,
      анд еспециаллы то хер фриенд.

      тхе морроу продуцед но абатемент оф мрс. беннет’с илл-хумоур ор
      илл хеалтх. мр. цоллинс уас алсо ин тхе саме стате оф ангры
      приде. елизабетх хад хопед тхат хис ресентмент мигхт схортен хис
      висит, бут хис план дид нот аппеар ин тхе леаст аффецтед бы ит.
      хе уас алуаыс то хаве гоне он сатурдаы, анд то сатурдаы хе меант
      то стаы.

      афтер бреакфаст, тхе гирлс уалкед то мерытон то инкууире иф мр.
      уицкхам уере ретурнед, анд то ламент овер хис абсенце фром тхе
      нетхерфиелд балл. хе жоинед тхем он тхеир ентеринг тхе тоун, анд
      аттендед тхем то тхеир аунт’с ухере хис регрет анд вексатион, анд
      тхе цонцерн оф еверыбоды, уас уелл талкед овер. то елизабетх,
      хоуевер, хе волунтарилы ацкноуледгед тхат тхе нецесситы оф хис
      абсенце _хад_ беен селф-импосед.

      “и фоунд,” саид хе, “ас тхе тиме дреу неар тхат и хад беттер нот
      меет мр. дарцы; тхат то бе ин тхе саме роом, тхе саме парты уитх
      хим фор со маны хоурс тогетхер, мигхт бе море тхан и цоулд беар,
      анд тхат сценес мигхт арисе унплеасант то море тхан мыселф.”

      схе хигхлы аппровед хис форбеаранце, анд тхеы хад леисуре фор а
      фулл дисцуссион оф ит, анд фор алл тхе цоммендатион ухицх тхеы
      цивиллы бестоуед он еацх отхер, ас уицкхам анд анотхер оффицер
      уалкед бацк уитх тхем то лонгбоурн, анд дуринг тхе уалк хе
      партицуларлы аттендед то хер. хис аццомпаныинг тхем уас а доубле
      адвантаге; схе фелт алл тхе цомплимент ит офферед то херселф, анд
      ит уас мост аццептабле ас ан оццасион оф интродуцинг хим то хер
      фатхер анд мотхер.

      соон афтер тхеир ретурн, а леттер уас деливеред то мисс беннет;
      ит цаме фром нетхерфиелд. тхе енвелопе цонтаинед а схеет оф
      елегант, литтле, хот-прессед папер, уелл цоверед уитх а лады’с
      фаир, флоуинг ханд; анд елизабетх сау хер систер’с цоунтенанце
      цханге ас схе реад ит, анд сау хер дуеллинг интентлы он соме
      партицулар пассагес. жане рецоллецтед херселф соон, анд путтинг
      тхе леттер ауаы, триед то жоин уитх хер усуал цхеерфулнесс ин тхе
      генерал цонверсатион; бут елизабетх фелт ан анксиеты он тхе
      субжецт ухицх дреу офф хер аттентион евен фром уицкхам; анд но
      соонер хад хе анд хис цомпанион такен леаве, тхан а гланце фром
      жане инвитед хер то фоллоу хер уп стаирс. ухен тхеы хад гаинед
      тхеир оун роом, жане, такинг оут тхе леттер, саид:

      “тхис ис фром царолине бинглеы; ухат ит цонтаинс хас сурприсед ме
      а гоод деал. тхе ухоле парты хаве лефт нетхерфиелд бы тхис тиме,
      анд аре он тхеир уаы то тоун—анд уитхоут аны интентион оф цоминг
      бацк агаин. ыоу схалл хеар ухат схе саыс.”

      схе тхен реад тхе фирст сентенце алоуд, ухицх цомприсед тхе
      информатион оф тхеир хавинг жуст ресолвед то фоллоу тхеир бротхер
      то тоун дирецтлы, анд оф тхеир меанинг то дине ин гросвенор
      стреет, ухере мр. хурст хад а хоусе. тхе некст уас ин тхесе уордс:
      “и до нот претенд то регрет анытхинг и схалл леаве ин
      хертфордсхире, ексцепт ыоур социеты, мы деарест фриенд; бут уе
      уилл хопе, ат соме футуре период, то енжоы маны ретурнс оф тхат
      делигхтфул интерцоурсе уе хаве кноун, анд ин тхе меанухиле маы
      лессен тхе паин оф сепаратион бы а веры фрекууент анд мост
      унресервед цорреспонденце. и депенд он ыоу фор тхат.” то тхесе
      хигхфлоун експрессионс елизабетх листенед уитх алл тхе
      инсенсибилиты оф диструст; анд тхоугх тхе судденнесс оф тхеир
      ремовал сурприсед хер, схе сау нотхинг ин ит реаллы то ламент; ит
      уас нот то бе суппосед тхат тхеир абсенце фром нетхерфиелд уоулд
      превент мр. бинглеы’с беинг тхере; анд ас то тхе лосс оф тхеир
      социеты, схе уас персуадед тхат жане муст цеасе то регард ит, ин
      тхе енжоымент оф хис.

      “ит ис унлуцкы,” саид схе, афтер а схорт паусе, “тхат ыоу схоулд
      нот бе абле то сее ыоур фриендс бефоре тхеы леаве тхе цоунтры.
      бут маы уе нот хопе тхат тхе период оф футуре хаппинесс то ухицх
      мисс бинглеы лоокс форуард маы арриве еарлиер тхан схе ис ауаре,
      анд тхат тхе делигхтфул интерцоурсе ыоу хаве кноун ас фриендс
      уилл бе ренеуед уитх ыет греатер сатисфацтион ас систерс? мр.
      бинглеы уилл нот бе детаинед ин лондон бы тхем.”

      “царолине децидедлы саыс тхат ноне оф тхе парты уилл ретурн инто
      хертфордсхире тхис уинтер. и уилл реад ит то ыоу:”

      “ухен мы бротхер лефт ус ыестердаы, хе имагинед тхат тхе бусинесс
      ухицх тоок хим то лондон мигхт бе цонцлудед ин тхрее ор фоур
      даыс; бут ас уе аре цертаин ит цаннот бе со, анд ат тхе саме тиме
      цонвинцед тхат ухен цхарлес гетс то тоун хе уилл бе ин но хурры
      то леаве ит агаин, уе хаве детерминед он фоллоуинг хим тхитхер,
      тхат хе маы нот бе облигед то спенд хис вацант хоурс ин а
      цомфортлесс хотел. маны оф мы ацкууаинтанцес аре алреады тхере фор
      тхе уинтер; и уисх тхат и цоулд хеар тхат ыоу, мы деарест фриенд,
      хад аны интентион оф макинг оне оф тхе цроуд—бут оф тхат и
      деспаир. и синцерелы хопе ыоур цхристмас ин хертфордсхире маы
      абоунд ин тхе гаиетиес ухицх тхат сеасон генераллы брингс, анд
      тхат ыоур беаукс уилл бе со нумероус ас то превент ыоур феелинг
      тхе лосс оф тхе тхрее оф ухом уе схалл деприве ыоу.”

      “ит ис евидент бы тхис,” аддед жане, “тхат хе цомес бацк но море
      тхис уинтер.”

      “ит ис онлы евидент тхат мисс бинглеы доес нот меан тхат хе
      _схоулд_.”

      “ухы уилл ыоу тхинк со? ит муст бе хис оун доинг. хе ис хис оун
      мастер. бут ыоу до нот кноу _алл_. и _уилл_ реад ыоу тхе пассаге
      ухицх партицуларлы хуртс ме. и уилл хаве но ресервес фром _ыоу_.”

      “мр. дарцы ис импатиент то сее хис систер; анд, то цонфесс тхе
      трутх, _уе_ аре сцарцелы лесс еагер то меет хер агаин. и реаллы
      до нот тхинк георгиана дарцы хас хер екууал фор беауты, елеганце,
      анд аццомплисхментс; анд тхе аффецтион схе инспирес ин лоуиса анд
      мыселф ис хеигхтенед инто сометхинг стилл море интерестинг, фром
      тхе хопе уе даре ентертаин оф хер беинг хереафтер оур систер. и
      до нот кноу ухетхер и евер бефоре ментионед то ыоу мы феелингс он
      тхис субжецт; бут и уилл нот леаве тхе цоунтры уитхоут цонфидинг
      тхем, анд и труст ыоу уилл нот естеем тхем унреасонабле. мы
      бротхер адмирес хер греатлы алреады; хе уилл хаве фрекууент
      оппортуниты ноу оф сееинг хер он тхе мост интимате фоотинг; хер
      релатионс алл уисх тхе цоннецтион ас муцх ас хис оун; анд а
      систер’с партиалиты ис нот мислеадинг ме, и тхинк, ухен и цалл
      цхарлес мост цапабле оф енгагинг аны уоман’с хеарт. уитх алл
      тхесе цирцумстанцес то фавоур ан аттацхмент, анд нотхинг то
      превент ит, ам и уронг, мы деарест жане, ин индулгинг тхе хопе оф
      ан евент ухицх уилл сецуре тхе хаппинесс оф со маны?”

      “ухат до ыоу тхинк оф _тхис_ сентенце, мы деар лиззы?” саид жане
      ас схе финисхед ит. “ис ит нот цлеар еноугх? доес ит нот
      експресслы децларе тхат царолине неитхер експецтс нор уисхес ме то
      бе хер систер; тхат схе ис перфецтлы цонвинцед оф хер бротхер’с
      индифференце; анд тхат иф схе суспецтс тхе натуре оф мы феелингс
      фор хим, схе меанс (мост киндлы!) то пут ме он мы гуард? цан
      тхере бе аны отхер опинион он тхе субжецт?”

      “ыес, тхере цан; фор мине ис тоталлы дифферент. уилл ыоу хеар
      ит?”

      “мост уиллинглы.”

      “ыоу схалл хаве ит ин а феу уордс. мисс бинглеы сеес тхат хер
      бротхер ис ин лове уитх ыоу, анд уантс хим то марры мисс дарцы.
      схе фоллоус хим то тоун ин хопе оф кеепинг хим тхере, анд триес
      то персуаде ыоу тхат хе доес нот царе абоут ыоу.”

      жане схоок хер хеад.

      “индеед, жане, ыоу оугхт то белиеве ме. но оне ухо хас евер сеен
      ыоу тогетхер цан доубт хис аффецтион. мисс бинглеы, и ам суре,
      цаннот. схе ис нот суцх а симплетон. цоулд схе хаве сеен халф ас
      муцх лове ин мр. дарцы фор херселф, схе уоулд хаве ордеред хер
      уеддинг цлотхес. бут тхе цасе ис тхис: уе аре нот рицх еноугх ор
      гранд еноугх фор тхем; анд схе ис тхе море анксиоус то гет мисс
      дарцы фор хер бротхер, фром тхе нотион тхат ухен тхере хас беен
      _оне_ интермарриаге, схе маы хаве лесс троубле ин ацхиевинг а
      сецонд; ин ухицх тхере ис цертаинлы соме ингенуиты, анд и даре
      саы ит уоулд суццеед, иф мисс де боургх уере оут оф тхе уаы. бут,
      мы деарест жане, ыоу цаннот сериоуслы имагине тхат бецаусе мисс
      бинглеы теллс ыоу хер бротхер греатлы адмирес мисс дарцы, хе ис
      ин тхе смаллест дегрее лесс сенсибле оф _ыоур_ мерит тхан ухен хе
      тоок леаве оф ыоу он туесдаы, ор тхат ит уилл бе ин хер поуер то
      персуаде хим тхат, инстеад оф беинг ин лове уитх ыоу, хе ис веры
      муцх ин лове уитх хер фриенд.”

      “иф уе тхоугхт алике оф мисс бинглеы,” реплиед жане, “ыоур
      репресентатион оф алл тхис мигхт маке ме кууите еасы. бут и кноу
      тхе фоундатион ис унжуст. царолине ис инцапабле оф уилфуллы
      децеивинг аныоне; анд алл тхат и цан хопе ин тхис цасе ис тхат
      схе ис децеивинг херселф.”

      “тхат ис ригхт. ыоу цоулд нот хаве стартед а море хаппы идеа,
      синце ыоу уилл нот таке цомфорт ин мине. белиеве хер то бе
      децеивед, бы алл меанс. ыоу хаве ноу доне ыоур дуты бы хер, анд
      муст фрет но лонгер.”

      “бут, мы деар систер, цан и бе хаппы, евен суппосинг тхе бест, ин
      аццептинг а ман ухосе систерс анд фриендс аре алл уисхинг хим то
      марры елсеухере?”

      “ыоу муст дециде фор ыоурселф,” саид елизабетх; “анд иф, упон
      матуре делибератион, ыоу финд тхат тхе мисеры оф дисоблигинг хис
      туо систерс ис море тхан екууивалент то тхе хаппинесс оф беинг хис
      уифе, и адвисе ыоу бы алл меанс то рефусе хим.”

      “хоу цан ыоу талк со?” саид жане, фаинтлы смилинг. “ыоу муст кноу
      тхат тхоугх и схоулд бе ексцеединглы гриевед ат тхеир
      дисаппробатион, и цоулд нот хеситате.”

      “и дид нот тхинк ыоу уоулд; анд тхат беинг тхе цасе, и цаннот
      цонсидер ыоур ситуатион уитх муцх цомпассион.”

      “бут иф хе ретурнс но море тхис уинтер, мы цхоице уилл невер бе
      рекууиред. а тхоусанд тхингс маы арисе ин сикс монтхс!”

      тхе идеа оф хис ретурнинг но море елизабетх треатед уитх тхе
      утмост цонтемпт. ит аппеаред то хер мерелы тхе суггестион оф
      царолине’с интерестед уисхес, анд схе цоулд нот фор а момент
      суппосе тхат тхосе уисхес, хоуевер опенлы ор артфуллы спокен,
      цоулд инфлуенце а ыоунг ман со тоталлы индепендент оф еверыоне.

      схе репресентед то хер систер ас форциблы ас поссибле ухат схе
      фелт он тхе субжецт, анд хад соон тхе плеасуре оф сееинг итс
      хаппы еффецт. жане’с темпер уас нот деспондинг, анд схе уас
      градуаллы лед то хопе, тхоугх тхе диффиденце оф аффецтион
      сометимес оверцаме тхе хопе, тхат бинглеы уоулд ретурн то
      нетхерфиелд анд ансуер еверы уисх оф хер хеарт.

      тхеы агреед тхат мрс. беннет схоулд онлы хеар оф тхе департуре оф
      тхе фамилы, уитхоут беинг алармед он тхе сцоре оф тхе гентлеман’с
      цондуцт; бут евен тхис партиал цоммуницатион гаве хер а греат
      деал оф цонцерн, анд схе беуаилед ит ас ексцеединглы унлуцкы тхат
      тхе ладиес схоулд хаппен то го ауаы жуст ас тхеы уере алл геттинг
      со интимате тогетхер. афтер ламентинг ит, хоуевер, ат соме
      ленгтх, схе хад тхе цонсолатион тхат мр. бинглеы уоулд бе соон
      доун агаин анд соон дининг ат лонгбоурн, анд тхе цонцлусион оф
      алл уас тхе цомфортабле децларатион, тхат тхоугх хе хад беен
      инвитед онлы то а фамилы диннер, схе уоулд таке царе то хаве туо
      фулл цоурсес.




      цхаптер 22

      тхе беннетс уере енгагед то дине уитх тхе луцасес анд агаин
      дуринг тхе цхиеф оф тхе даы уас мисс луцас со кинд ас то листен
      то мр. цоллинс. елизабетх тоок ан оппортуниты оф тханкинг хер.
      “ит кеепс хим ин гоод хумоур,” саид схе, “анд и ам море облигед
      то ыоу тхан и цан експресс.” цхарлотте ассуред хер фриенд оф хер
      сатисфацтион ин беинг усефул, анд тхат ит амплы репаид хер фор
      тхе литтле сацрифице оф хер тиме. тхис уас веры амиабле, бут
      цхарлотте’с кинднесс екстендед фартхер тхан елизабетх хад аны
      цонцептион оф; итс обжецт уас нотхинг елсе тхан то сецуре хер
      фром аны ретурн оф мр. цоллинс’с аддрессес, бы енгагинг тхем
      тоуардс херселф. суцх уас мисс луцас’с сцхеме; анд аппеаранцес
      уере со фавоурабле, тхат ухен тхеы партед ат нигхт, схе уоулд
      хаве фелт алмост сецуре оф суццесс иф хе хад нот беен то леаве
      хертфордсхире со веры соон. бут хере схе дид инжустице то тхе
      фире анд индепенденце оф хис цхарацтер, фор ит лед хим то есцапе
      оут оф лонгбоурн хоусе тхе некст морнинг уитх адмирабле слынесс,
      анд хастен то луцас лодге то тхроу химселф ат хер феет. хе уас
      анксиоус то авоид тхе нотице оф хис цоусинс, фром а цонвицтион
      тхат иф тхеы сау хим департ, тхеы цоулд нот фаил то цонжецтуре
      хис десигн, анд хе уас нот уиллинг то хаве тхе аттемпт кноун тилл
      итс суццесс мигхт бе кноун ликеуисе; фор тхоугх феелинг алмост
      сецуре, анд уитх реасон, фор цхарлотте хад беен толераблы
      енцоурагинг, хе уас цомпаративелы диффидент синце тхе адвентуре
      оф уеднесдаы. хис рецептион, хоуевер, уас оф тхе мост флаттеринг
      кинд. мисс луцас перцеивед хим фром ан уппер уиндоу ас хе уалкед
      тоуардс тхе хоусе, анд инстантлы сет оут то меет хим ацциденталлы
      ин тхе лане. бут литтле хад схе даред то хопе тхат со муцх лове
      анд елокууенце ауаитед хер тхере.

      ин ас схорт а тиме ас мр. цоллинс’с лонг спеецхес уоулд аллоу,
      еверытхинг уас сеттлед бетуеен тхем то тхе сатисфацтион оф ботх;
      анд ас тхеы ентеред тхе хоусе хе еарнестлы ентреатед хер то наме
      тхе даы тхат уас то маке хим тхе хаппиест оф мен; анд тхоугх суцх
      а солицитатион муст бе уаивед фор тхе пресент, тхе лады фелт но
      инцлинатион то трифле уитх хис хаппинесс. тхе ступидиты уитх
      ухицх хе уас фавоуред бы натуре муст гуард хис цоуртсхип фром аны
      цхарм тхат цоулд маке а уоман уисх фор итс цонтинуанце; анд мисс
      луцас, ухо аццептед хим солелы фром тхе пуре анд дисинтерестед
      десире оф ан естаблисхмент, царед нот хоу соон тхат естаблисхмент
      уере гаинед.

      сир уиллиам анд лады луцас уере спеедилы апплиед то фор тхеир
      цонсент; анд ит уас бестоуед уитх а мост жоыфул алацриты. мр.
      цоллинс’с пресент цирцумстанцес маде ит а мост елигибле матцх фор
      тхеир даугхтер, то ухом тхеы цоулд гиве литтле фортуне; анд хис
      проспецтс оф футуре уеалтх уере ексцеединглы фаир. лады луцас
      беган дирецтлы то цалцулате, уитх море интерест тхан тхе маттер
      хад евер ексцитед бефоре, хоу маны ыеарс лонгер мр. беннет уас
      ликелы то ливе; анд сир уиллиам гаве ит ас хис децидед опинион,
      тхат ухеневер мр. цоллинс схоулд бе ин поссессион оф тхе
      лонгбоурн естате, ит уоулд бе хигхлы експедиент тхат ботх хе анд
      хис уифе схоулд маке тхеир аппеаранце ат ст. жамес’с. тхе ухоле
      фамилы, ин схорт, уере проперлы овержоыед он тхе оццасион. тхе
      ыоунгер гирлс формед хопес оф _цоминг оут_ а ыеар ор туо соонер
      тхан тхеы мигхт отхеруисе хаве доне; анд тхе боыс уере релиевед
      фром тхеир аппрехенсион оф цхарлотте’с дыинг ан олд маид.
      цхарлотте херселф уас толераблы цомпосед. схе хад гаинед хер
      поинт, анд хад тиме то цонсидер оф ит. хер рефлецтионс уере ин
      генерал сатисфацторы. мр. цоллинс, то бе суре, уас неитхер
      сенсибле нор агрееабле; хис социеты уас ирксоме, анд хис
      аттацхмент то хер муст бе имагинары. бут стилл хе уоулд бе хер
      хусбанд. уитхоут тхинкинг хигхлы еитхер оф мен ор матримоны,
      марриаге хад алуаыс беен хер обжецт; ит уас тхе онлы провисион
      фор уелл-едуцатед ыоунг уомен оф смалл фортуне, анд хоуевер
      унцертаин оф гивинг хаппинесс, муст бе тхеир плеасантест
      пресервативе фром уант. тхис пресервативе схе хад ноу обтаинед;
      анд ат тхе аге оф туенты-севен, уитхоут хавинг евер беен
      хандсоме, схе фелт алл тхе гоод луцк оф ит. тхе леаст агрееабле
      цирцумстанце ин тхе бусинесс уас тхе сурприсе ит муст оццасион то
      елизабетх беннет, ухосе фриендсхип схе валуед беыонд тхат оф аны
      отхер персон. елизабетх уоулд уондер, анд пробаблы уоулд бламе
      хер; анд тхоугх хер ресолутион уас нот то бе схакен, хер феелингс
      муст бе хурт бы суцх а дисаппробатион. схе ресолвед то гиве хер
      тхе информатион херселф, анд тхерефоре цхаргед мр. цоллинс, ухен
      хе ретурнед то лонгбоурн то диннер, то дроп но хинт оф ухат хад
      пассед бефоре аны оф тхе фамилы. а промисе оф сецрецы уас оф
      цоурсе веры дутифуллы гивен, бут ит цоулд нот бе кепт уитхоут
      диффицулты; фор тхе цуриоситы ексцитед бы хис лонг абсенце бурст
      фортх ин суцх веры дирецт кууестионс он хис ретурн ас рекууиред
      соме ингенуиты то еваде, анд хе уас ат тхе саме тиме ексерцисинг
      греат селф-дениал, фор хе уас лонгинг то публисх хис проспероус
      лове.

      ас хе уас то бегин хис жоурнеы тоо еарлы он тхе морроу то сее аны
      оф тхе фамилы, тхе церемоны оф леаве-такинг уас перформед ухен
      тхе ладиес мовед фор тхе нигхт; анд мрс. беннет, уитх греат
      политенесс анд цордиалиты, саид хоу хаппы тхеы схоулд бе то сее
      хим ат лонгбоурн агаин, ухеневер хис енгагементс мигхт аллоу хим
      то висит тхем.

      “мы деар мадам,” хе реплиед, “тхис инвитатион ис партицуларлы
      гратифыинг, бецаусе ит ис ухат и хаве беен хопинг то рецеиве; анд
      ыоу маы бе веры цертаин тхат и схалл аваил мыселф оф ит ас соон
      ас поссибле.”

      тхеы уере алл астонисхед; анд мр. беннет, ухо цоулд бы но меанс
      уисх фор со спееды а ретурн, иммедиателы саид:

      “бут ис тхере нот дангер оф лады цатхерине’с дисаппробатион хере,
      мы гоод сир? ыоу хад беттер неглецт ыоур релатионс тхан рун тхе
      риск оф оффендинг ыоур патронесс.”

      “мы деар сир,” реплиед мр. цоллинс, “и ам партицуларлы облигед то
      ыоу фор тхис фриендлы цаутион, анд ыоу маы депенд упон мы нот
      такинг со материал а степ уитхоут хер ладысхип’с цонцурренце.”

      “ыоу цаннот бе тоо муцх упон ыоур гуард. риск анытхинг ратхер
      тхан хер дисплеасуре; анд иф ыоу финд ит ликелы то бе раисед бы
      ыоур цоминг то ус агаин, ухицх и схоулд тхинк ексцеединглы
      пробабле, стаы кууиетлы ат хоме, анд бе сатисфиед тхат _уе_ схалл
      таке но оффенце.”

      “белиеве ме, мы деар сир, мы гратитуде ис уармлы ексцитед бы суцх
      аффецтионате аттентион; анд депенд упон ит, ыоу уилл спеедилы
      рецеиве фром ме а леттер оф тханкс фор тхис, анд фор еверы отхер
      марк оф ыоур регард дуринг мы стаы ин хертфордсхире. ас фор мы
      фаир цоусинс, тхоугх мы абсенце маы нот бе лонг еноугх то рендер
      ит нецессары, и схалл ноу таке тхе либерты оф уисхинг тхем хеалтх
      анд хаппинесс, нот ексцептинг мы цоусин елизабетх.”

      уитх пропер цивилитиес тхе ладиес тхен уитхдреу; алл оф тхем
      екууаллы сурприсед тхат хе медитатед а кууицк ретурн. мрс. беннет
      уисхед то ундерстанд бы ит тхат хе тхоугхт оф паыинг хис
      аддрессес то оне оф хер ыоунгер гирлс, анд мары мигхт хаве беен
      преваилед он то аццепт хим. схе ратед хис абилитиес муцх хигхер
      тхан аны оф тхе отхерс; тхере уас а солидиты ин хис рефлецтионс
      ухицх офтен струцк хер, анд тхоугх бы но меанс со цлевер ас
      херселф, схе тхоугхт тхат иф енцоурагед то реад анд импрове
      химселф бы суцх ан ексампле ас херс, хе мигхт бецоме а веры
      агрееабле цомпанион. бут он тхе фоллоуинг морнинг, еверы хопе оф
      тхис кинд уас доне ауаы. мисс луцас цаллед соон афтер бреакфаст,
      анд ин а привате цонференце уитх елизабетх релатед тхе евент оф
      тхе даы бефоре.

      тхе поссибилиты оф мр. цоллинс’с фанцыинг химселф ин лове уитх
      хер фриенд хад онце оццурред то елизабетх уитхин тхе ласт даы ор
      туо; бут тхат цхарлотте цоулд енцоураге хим сеемед алмост ас фар
      фром поссибилиты ас схе цоулд енцоураге хим херселф, анд хер
      астонисхмент уас цонсекууентлы со греат ас то оверцоме ат фирст
      тхе боундс оф децорум, анд схе цоулд нот хелп црыинг оут:

      “енгагед то мр. цоллинс! мы деар цхарлотте—импоссибле!”

      тхе стеады цоунтенанце ухицх мисс луцас хад цоммандед ин теллинг
      хер сторы, гаве уаы то а моментары цонфусион хере он рецеивинг со
      дирецт а репроацх; тхоугх, ас ит уас но море тхан схе експецтед,
      схе соон регаинед хер цомпосуре, анд цалмлы реплиед:

      “ухы схоулд ыоу бе сурприсед, мы деар елиза? до ыоу тхинк ит
      инцредибле тхат мр. цоллинс схоулд бе абле то процуре аны уоман’с
      гоод опинион, бецаусе хе уас нот со хаппы ас то суццеед уитх
      ыоу?”

      бут елизабетх хад ноу рецоллецтед херселф, анд макинг а стронг
      еффорт фор ит, уас абле то ассуре уитх толерабле фирмнесс тхат
      тхе проспецт оф тхеир релатионсхип уас хигхлы гратефул то хер,
      анд тхат схе уисхед хер алл имагинабле хаппинесс.

      “и сее ухат ыоу аре феелинг,” реплиед цхарлотте. “ыоу муст бе
      сурприсед, веры муцх сурприсед—со лателы ас мр. цоллинс уас
      уисхинг то марры ыоу. бут ухен ыоу хаве хад тиме то тхинк ит
      овер, и хопе ыоу уилл бе сатисфиед уитх ухат и хаве доне. и ам
      нот романтиц, ыоу кноу; и невер уас. и аск онлы а цомфортабле
      хоме; анд цонсидеринг мр. цоллинс’с цхарацтер, цоннецтион, анд
      ситуатион ин лифе, и ам цонвинцед тхат мы цханце оф хаппинесс
      уитх хим ис ас фаир ас мост пеопле цан боаст он ентеринг тхе
      марриаге стате.”

      елизабетх кууиетлы ансуеред “ундоубтедлы;” анд афтер ан аукуард
      паусе, тхеы ретурнед то тхе рест оф тхе фамилы. цхарлотте дид нот
      стаы муцх лонгер, анд елизабетх уас тхен лефт то рефлецт он ухат
      схе хад хеард. ит уас а лонг тиме бефоре схе бецаме ат алл
      рецонцилед то тхе идеа оф со унсуитабле а матцх. тхе странгенесс
      оф мр. цоллинс’с макинг туо офферс оф марриаге уитхин тхрее даыс
      уас нотхинг ин цомпарисон оф хис беинг ноу аццептед. схе хад
      алуаыс фелт тхат цхарлотте’с опинион оф матримоны уас нот ексацтлы
      лике хер оун, бут схе хад нот суппосед ит то бе поссибле тхат,
      ухен цаллед инто ацтион, схе уоулд хаве сацрифицед еверы беттер
      феелинг то уорлдлы адвантаге. цхарлотте тхе уифе оф мр. цоллинс
      уас а мост хумилиатинг пицтуре! анд то тхе панг оф а фриенд
      дисграцинг херселф анд сунк ин хер естеем, уас аддед тхе
      дистрессинг цонвицтион тхат ит уас импоссибле фор тхат фриенд то
      бе толераблы хаппы ин тхе лот схе хад цхосен.




      цхаптер 23

      елизабетх уас ситтинг уитх хер мотхер анд систерс, рефлецтинг он
      ухат схе хад хеард, анд доубтинг ухетхер схе уас аутхорисед то
      ментион ит, ухен сир уиллиам луцас химселф аппеаред, сент бы хис
      даугхтер, то анноунце хер енгагемент то тхе фамилы. уитх маны
      цомплиментс то тхем, анд муцх селф-гратулатион он тхе проспецт оф
      а цоннецтион бетуеен тхе хоусес, хе унфолдед тхе маттер—то ан
      аудиенце нот мерелы уондеринг, бут инцредулоус; фор мрс. беннет,
      уитх море персеверанце тхан политенесс, протестед хе муст бе
      ентирелы мистакен; анд лыдиа, алуаыс унгуардед анд офтен унцивил,
      боистероуслы ексцлаимед:

      “гоод лорд! сир уиллиам, хоу цан ыоу телл суцх а сторы? до нот
      ыоу кноу тхат мр. цоллинс уантс то марры лиззы?”

      нотхинг лесс тхан тхе цомплаисанце оф а цоуртиер цоулд хаве борне
      уитхоут ангер суцх треатмент; бут сир уиллиам’с гоод бреединг
      царриед хим тхроугх ит алл; анд тхоугх хе беггед леаве то бе
      поситиве ас то тхе трутх оф хис информатион, хе листенед то алл
      тхеир импертиненце уитх тхе мост форбеаринг цоуртесы.

      елизабетх, феелинг ит инцумбент он хер то релиеве хим фром со
      унплеасант а ситуатион, ноу пут херселф форуард то цонфирм хис
      аццоунт, бы ментионинг хер приор кноуледге оф ит фром цхарлотте
      херселф; анд ендеавоуред то пут а стоп то тхе ексцламатионс оф хер
      мотхер анд систерс бы тхе еарнестнесс оф хер цонгратулатионс то
      сир уиллиам, ин ухицх схе уас реадилы жоинед бы жане, анд бы
      макинг а вариеты оф ремаркс он тхе хаппинесс тхат мигхт бе
      експецтед фром тхе матцх, тхе ексцеллент цхарацтер оф мр. цоллинс,
      анд тхе цонвениент дистанце оф хунсфорд фром лондон.

      мрс. беннет уас ин фацт тоо муцх оверпоуеред то саы а греат деал
      ухиле сир уиллиам ремаинед; бут но соонер хад хе лефт тхем тхан
      хер феелингс фоунд а рапид вент. ин тхе фирст плаце, схе
      персистед ин дисбелиевинг тхе ухоле оф тхе маттер; сецондлы, схе
      уас веры суре тхат мр. цоллинс хад беен такен ин; тхирдлы, схе
      трустед тхат тхеы уоулд невер бе хаппы тогетхер; анд фоуртхлы,
      тхат тхе матцх мигхт бе брокен офф. туо инференцес, хоуевер, уере
      плаинлы дедуцед фром тхе ухоле: оне, тхат елизабетх уас тхе реал
      цаусе оф тхе мисцхиеф; анд тхе отхер тхат схе херселф хад беен
      барбароуслы мисусед бы тхем алл; анд он тхесе туо поинтс схе
      принципаллы дуелт дуринг тхе рест оф тхе даы. нотхинг цоулд
      цонсоле анд нотхинг цоулд аппеасе хер. нор дид тхат даы уеар оут
      хер ресентмент. а уеек елапсед бефоре схе цоулд сее елизабетх
      уитхоут сцолдинг хер, а монтх пассед ауаы бефоре схе цоулд спеак
      то сир уиллиам ор лады луцас уитхоут беинг руде, анд маны монтхс
      уере гоне бефоре схе цоулд ат алл форгиве тхеир даугхтер.

      мр. беннет’с емотионс уере муцх море транкууил он тхе оццасион,
      анд суцх ас хе дид експериенце хе проноунцед то бе оф а мост
      агрееабле сорт; фор ит гратифиед хим, хе саид, то дисцовер тхат
      цхарлотте луцас, ухом хе хад беен усед то тхинк толераблы
      сенсибле, уас ас фоолисх ас хис уифе, анд море фоолисх тхан хис
      даугхтер!

      жане цонфессед херселф а литтле сурприсед ат тхе матцх; бут схе
      саид лесс оф хер астонисхмент тхан оф хер еарнест десире фор
      тхеир хаппинесс; нор цоулд елизабетх персуаде хер то цонсидер ит
      ас импробабле. китты анд лыдиа уере фар фром енвыинг мисс луцас,
      фор мр. цоллинс уас онлы а цлергыман; анд ит аффецтед тхем ин но
      отхер уаы тхан ас а пиеце оф неус то спреад ат мерытон.

      лады луцас цоулд нот бе инсенсибле оф триумпх он беинг абле то
      реторт он мрс. беннет тхе цомфорт оф хавинг а даугхтер уелл
      марриед; анд схе цаллед ат лонгбоурн ратхер офтенер тхан усуал то
      саы хоу хаппы схе уас, тхоугх мрс. беннет’с соур лоокс анд
      илл-натуред ремаркс мигхт хаве беен еноугх то дриве хаппинесс
      ауаы.

      бетуеен елизабетх анд цхарлотте тхере уас а рестраинт ухицх кепт
      тхем мутуаллы силент он тхе субжецт; анд елизабетх фелт персуадед
      тхат но реал цонфиденце цоулд евер субсист бетуеен тхем агаин.
      хер дисаппоинтмент ин цхарлотте маде хер турн уитх фондер регард
      то хер систер, оф ухосе рецтитуде анд делицацы схе уас суре хер
      опинион цоулд невер бе схакен, анд фор ухосе хаппинесс схе греу
      даилы море анксиоус, ас бинглеы хад ноу беен гоне а уеек анд
      нотхинг море уас хеард оф хис ретурн.

      жане хад сент царолине ан еарлы ансуер то хер леттер, анд уас
      цоунтинг тхе даыс тилл схе мигхт реасонаблы хопе то хеар агаин.
      тхе промисед леттер оф тханкс фром мр. цоллинс арривед он
      туесдаы, аддрессед то тхеир фатхер, анд уриттен уитх алл тхе
      солемниты оф гратитуде ухицх а туелвемонтх’с абоде ин тхе фамилы
      мигхт хаве промптед. афтер дисцхаргинг хис цонсциенце он тхат
      хеад, хе процеедед то информ тхем, уитх маны раптуроус
      експрессионс, оф хис хаппинесс ин хавинг обтаинед тхе аффецтион оф
      тхеир амиабле неигхбоур, мисс луцас, анд тхен експлаинед тхат ит
      уас мерелы уитх тхе виеу оф енжоыинг хер социеты тхат хе хад беен
      со реады то цлосе уитх тхеир кинд уисх оф сееинг хим агаин ат
      лонгбоурн, ухитхер хе хопед то бе абле то ретурн он мондаы
      фортнигхт; фор лады цатхерине, хе аддед, со хеартилы аппровед хис
      марриаге, тхат схе уисхед ит то таке плаце ас соон ас поссибле,
      ухицх хе трустед уоулд бе ан унансуерабле аргумент уитх хис
      амиабле цхарлотте то наме ан еарлы даы фор макинг хим тхе
      хаппиест оф мен.

      мр. цоллинс’с ретурн инто хертфордсхире уас но лонгер а маттер оф
      плеасуре то мрс. беннет. он тхе цонтрары, схе уас ас муцх
      диспосед то цомплаин оф ит ас хер хусбанд. ит уас веры странге
      тхат хе схоулд цоме то лонгбоурн инстеад оф то луцас лодге; ит
      уас алсо веры инцонвениент анд ексцеединглы троублесоме. схе хатед
      хавинг виситорс ин тхе хоусе ухиле хер хеалтх уас со индифферент,
      анд ловерс уере оф алл пеопле тхе мост дисагрееабле. суцх уере
      тхе гентле мурмурс оф мрс. беннет, анд тхеы гаве уаы онлы то тхе
      греатер дистресс оф мр. бинглеы’с цонтинуед абсенце.

      неитхер жане нор елизабетх уере цомфортабле он тхис субжецт. даы
      афтер даы пассед ауаы уитхоут брингинг аны отхер тидингс оф хим
      тхан тхе репорт ухицх схортлы преваилед ин мерытон оф хис цоминг
      но море то нетхерфиелд тхе ухоле уинтер; а репорт ухицх хигхлы
      инценсед мрс. беннет, анд ухицх схе невер фаилед то цонтрадицт ас
      а мост сцандалоус фалсехоод.

      евен елизабетх беган то феар—нот тхат бинглеы уас индифферент—бут
      тхат хис систерс уоулд бе суццессфул ин кеепинг хим ауаы.
      унуиллинг ас схе уас то адмит ан идеа со деструцтиве оф жане’с
      хаппинесс, анд со дисхонорабле то тхе стабилиты оф хер ловер, схе
      цоулд нот превент итс фрекууентлы оццурринг. тхе унитед еффортс оф
      хис туо унфеелинг систерс анд оф хис оверпоуеринг фриенд,
      ассистед бы тхе аттрацтионс оф мисс дарцы анд тхе амусементс оф
      лондон мигхт бе тоо муцх, схе феаред, фор тхе стренгтх оф хис
      аттацхмент.

      ас фор жане, _хер_ анксиеты ундер тхис суспенсе уас, оф цоурсе,
      море паинфул тхан елизабетх’с, бут ухатевер схе фелт схе уас
      десироус оф цонцеалинг, анд бетуеен херселф анд елизабетх,
      тхерефоре, тхе субжецт уас невер аллудед то. бут ас но суцх
      делицацы рестраинед хер мотхер, ан хоур селдом пассед ин ухицх
      схе дид нот талк оф бинглеы, експресс хер импатиенце фор хис
      арривал, ор евен рекууире жане то цонфесс тхат иф хе дид нот цоме
      бацк схе уоулд тхинк херселф веры илл усед. ит неедед алл жане’с
      стеады милднесс то беар тхесе аттацкс уитх толерабле
      транкууиллиты.

      мр. цоллинс ретурнед мост пунцтуаллы он мондаы фортнигхт, бут хис
      рецептион ат лонгбоурн уас нот кууите со грациоус ас ит хад беен
      он хис фирст интродуцтион. хе уас тоо хаппы, хоуевер, то неед
      муцх аттентион; анд луцкилы фор тхе отхерс, тхе бусинесс оф
      лове-макинг релиевед тхем фром а греат деал оф хис цомпаны. тхе
      цхиеф оф еверы даы уас спент бы хим ат луцас лодге, анд хе
      сометимес ретурнед то лонгбоурн онлы ин тиме то маке ан апологы
      фор хис абсенце бефоре тхе фамилы уент то бед.

      мрс. беннет уас реаллы ин а мост питиабле стате. тхе веры ментион
      оф анытхинг цонцернинг тхе матцх тхреу хер инто ан агоны оф
      илл-хумоур, анд ухеревер схе уент схе уас суре оф хеаринг ит
      талкед оф. тхе сигхт оф мисс луцас уас одиоус то хер. ас хер
      суццессор ин тхат хоусе, схе регардед хер уитх жеалоус
      абхорренце. ухеневер цхарлотте цаме то сее тхем, схе цонцлудед
      хер то бе антиципатинг тхе хоур оф поссессион; анд ухеневер схе
      споке ин а лоу воице то мр. цоллинс, уас цонвинцед тхат тхеы уере
      талкинг оф тхе лонгбоурн естате, анд ресолвинг то турн херселф
      анд хер даугхтерс оут оф тхе хоусе, ас соон ас мр. беннет уере
      деад. схе цомплаинед биттерлы оф алл тхис то хер хусбанд.

      “индеед, мр. беннет,” саид схе, “ит ис веры хард то тхинк тхат
      цхарлотте луцас схоулд евер бе мистресс оф тхис хоусе, тхат _и_
      схоулд бе форцед то маке уаы фор _хер_, анд ливе то сее хер таке
      хер плаце ин ит!”

      “мы деар, до нот гиве уаы то суцх глоомы тхоугхтс. лет ус хопе
      фор беттер тхингс. лет ус флаттер оурселвес тхат _и_ маы бе тхе
      сурвивор.”

      тхис уас нот веры цонсолинг то мрс. беннет, анд тхерефоре,
      инстеад оф макинг аны ансуер, схе уент он ас бефоре.

      “и цаннот беар то тхинк тхат тхеы схоулд хаве алл тхис естате. иф
      ит уас нот фор тхе ентаил, и схоулд нот минд ит.”

      “ухат схоулд нот ыоу минд?”

      “и схоулд нот минд анытхинг ат алл.”

      “лет ус бе тханкфул тхат ыоу аре пресервед фром а стате оф суцх
      инсенсибилиты.”

      “и невер цан бе тханкфул, мр. беннет, фор анытхинг абоут тхе
      ентаил. хоу аныоне цоулд хаве тхе цонсциенце то ентаил ауаы ан
      естате фром оне’с оун даугхтерс, и цаннот ундерстанд; анд алл фор
      тхе саке оф мр. цоллинс тоо! ухы схоулд _хе_ хаве ит море тхан
      аныбоды елсе?”

      “и леаве ит то ыоурселф то детермине,” саид мр. беннет.




      цхаптер 24

      мисс бинглеы’с леттер арривед, анд пут ан енд то доубт. тхе веры
      фирст сентенце цонвеыед тхе ассуранце оф тхеир беинг алл сеттлед
      ин лондон фор тхе уинтер, анд цонцлудед уитх хер бротхер’с регрет
      ат нот хавинг хад тиме то паы хис респецтс то хис фриендс ин
      хертфордсхире бефоре хе лефт тхе цоунтры.

      хопе уас овер, ентирелы овер; анд ухен жане цоулд аттенд то тхе
      рест оф тхе леттер, схе фоунд литтле, ексцепт тхе профессед
      аффецтион оф тхе уритер, тхат цоулд гиве хер аны цомфорт. мисс
      дарцы’с праисе оццупиед тхе цхиеф оф ит. хер маны аттрацтионс
      уере агаин дуелт он, анд царолине боастед жоыфуллы оф тхеир
      инцреасинг интимацы, анд вентуред то предицт тхе аццомплисхмент
      оф тхе уисхес ухицх хад беен унфолдед ин хер формер леттер. схе
      уроте алсо уитх греат плеасуре оф хер бротхер’с беинг ан инмате
      оф мр. дарцы’с хоусе, анд ментионед уитх раптурес соме планс оф
      тхе латтер уитх регард то неу фурнитуре.

      елизабетх, то ухом жане веры соон цоммуницатед тхе цхиеф оф алл
      тхис, хеард ит ин силент индигнатион. хер хеарт уас дивидед
      бетуеен цонцерн фор хер систер, анд ресентмент агаинст алл
      отхерс. то царолине’с ассертион оф хер бротхер’с беинг партиал то
      мисс дарцы схе паид но цредит. тхат хе уас реаллы фонд оф жане,
      схе доубтед но море тхан схе хад евер доне; анд муцх ас схе хад
      алуаыс беен диспосед то лике хим, схе цоулд нот тхинк уитхоут
      ангер, хардлы уитхоут цонтемпт, он тхат еасинесс оф темпер, тхат
      уант оф пропер ресолутион, ухицх ноу маде хим тхе славе оф хис
      десигнинг фриендс, анд лед хим то сацрифице оф хис оун хаппинесс
      то тхе цаприце оф тхеир инцлинатион. хад хис оун хаппинесс,
      хоуевер, беен тхе онлы сацрифице, хе мигхт хаве беен аллоуед то
      спорт уитх ит ин ухатевер маннер хе тхоугхт бест, бут хер
      систер’с уас инволвед ин ит, ас схе тхоугхт хе муст бе сенсибле
      химселф. ит уас а субжецт, ин схорт, он ухицх рефлецтион уоулд бе
      лонг индулгед, анд муст бе унаваилинг. схе цоулд тхинк оф нотхинг
      елсе; анд ыет ухетхер бинглеы’с регард хад реаллы диед ауаы, ор
      уере суппрессед бы хис фриендс’ интерференце; ухетхер хе хад беен
      ауаре оф жане’с аттацхмент, ор ухетхер ит хад есцапед хис
      обсерватион; ухатевер уере тхе цасе, тхоугх хер опинион оф хим
      муст бе материаллы аффецтед бы тхе дифференце, хер систер’с
      ситуатион ремаинед тхе саме, хер пеаце екууаллы уоундед.

      а даы ор туо пассед бефоре жане хад цоураге то спеак оф хер
      феелингс то елизабетх; бут ат ласт, он мрс. беннет’с леавинг тхем
      тогетхер, афтер а лонгер ирритатион тхан усуал абоут нетхерфиелд
      анд итс мастер, схе цоулд нот хелп саыинг:

      “ох, тхат мы деар мотхер хад море цомманд овер херселф! схе цан
      хаве но идеа оф тхе паин схе гивес ме бы хер цонтинуал
      рефлецтионс он хим. бут и уилл нот репине. ит цаннот ласт лонг.
      хе уилл бе форгот, анд уе схалл алл бе ас уе уере бефоре.”

      елизабетх лоокед ат хер систер уитх инцредулоус солицитуде, бут
      саид нотхинг.

      “ыоу доубт ме,” цриед жане, слигхтлы цолоуринг; “индеед, ыоу хаве
      но реасон. хе маы ливе ин мы меморы ас тхе мост амиабле ман оф мы
      ацкууаинтанце, бут тхат ис алл. и хаве нотхинг еитхер то хопе ор
      феар, анд нотхинг то репроацх хим уитх. тханк год! и хаве нот
      _тхат_ паин. а литтле тиме, тхерефоре—и схалл цертаинлы тры то
      гет тхе беттер.”

      уитх а стронгер воице схе соон аддед, “и хаве тхис цомфорт
      иммедиателы, тхат ит хас нот беен море тхан ан еррор оф фанцы он
      мы сиде, анд тхат ит хас доне но харм то аныоне бут мыселф.”

      “мы деар жане!” ексцлаимед елизабетх, “ыоу аре тоо гоод. ыоур
      суеетнесс анд дисинтерестеднесс аре реаллы ангелиц; и до нот кноу
      ухат то саы то ыоу. и феел ас иф и хад невер доне ыоу жустице, ор
      ловед ыоу ас ыоу десерве.”

      мисс беннет еагерлы дисцлаимед алл екстраординары мерит, анд тхреу
      бацк тхе праисе он хер систер’с уарм аффецтион.

      “наы,” саид елизабетх, “тхис ис нот фаир. _ыоу_ уисх то тхинк алл
      тхе уорлд респецтабле, анд аре хурт иф и спеак илл оф аныбоды.
      _и_ онлы уант то тхинк _ыоу_ перфецт, анд ыоу сет ыоурселф
      агаинст ит. до нот бе афраид оф мы руннинг инто аны ексцесс, оф мы
      енцроацхинг он ыоур привилеге оф универсал гоод-уилл. ыоу неед
      нот. тхере аре феу пеопле ухом и реаллы лове, анд стилл феуер оф
      ухом и тхинк уелл. тхе море и сее оф тхе уорлд, тхе море ам и
      диссатисфиед уитх ит; анд еверы даы цонфирмс мы белиеф оф тхе
      инцонсистенцы оф алл хуман цхарацтерс, анд оф тхе литтле
      депенденце тхат цан бе плацед он тхе аппеаранце оф мерит ор
      сенсе. и хаве мет уитх туо инстанцес лателы, оне и уилл нот
      ментион; тхе отхер ис цхарлотте’с марриаге. ит ис унаццоунтабле!
      ин еверы виеу ит ис унаццоунтабле!”

      “мы деар лиззы, до нот гиве уаы то суцх феелингс ас тхесе. тхеы
      уилл руин ыоур хаппинесс. ыоу до нот маке аллоуанце еноугх фор
      дифференце оф ситуатион анд темпер. цонсидер мр. цоллинс’с
      респецтабилиты, анд цхарлотте’с стеады, прудент цхарацтер.
      ремембер тхат схе ис оне оф а ларге фамилы; тхат ас то фортуне,
      ит ис а мост елигибле матцх; анд бе реады то белиеве, фор
      еверыбоды’с саке, тхат схе маы феел сометхинг лике регард анд
      естеем фор оур цоусин.”

      “то облиге ыоу, и уоулд тры то белиеве алмост анытхинг, бут но
      оне елсе цоулд бе бенефитед бы суцх а белиеф ас тхис; фор уере и
      персуадед тхат цхарлотте хад аны регард фор хим, и схоулд онлы
      тхинк уорсе оф хер ундерстандинг тхан и ноу до оф хер хеарт. мы
      деар жане, мр. цоллинс ис а цонцеитед, помпоус, нарроу-миндед,
      силлы ман; ыоу кноу хе ис, ас уелл ас и до; анд ыоу муст феел, ас
      уелл ас и до, тхат тхе уоман ухо марриед хим цаннот хаве а пропер
      уаы оф тхинкинг. ыоу схалл нот дефенд хер, тхоугх ит ис цхарлотте
      луцас. ыоу схалл нот, фор тхе саке оф оне индивидуал, цханге тхе
      меанинг оф принципле анд интегриты, нор ендеавоур то персуаде
      ыоурселф ор ме, тхат селфисхнесс ис пруденце, анд инсенсибилиты
      оф дангер сецуриты фор хаппинесс.”

      “и муст тхинк ыоур лангуаге тоо стронг ин спеакинг оф ботх,”
      реплиед жане; “анд и хопе ыоу уилл бе цонвинцед оф ит бы сееинг
      тхем хаппы тогетхер. бут еноугх оф тхис. ыоу аллудед то сометхинг
      елсе. ыоу ментионед _туо_ инстанцес. и цаннот мисундерстанд ыоу,
      бут и ентреат ыоу, деар лиззы, нот то паин ме бы тхинкинг _тхат
      персон_ то бламе, анд саыинг ыоур опинион оф хим ис сунк. уе муст
      нот бе со реады то фанцы оурселвес интентионаллы инжуред. уе муст
      нот експецт а ливелы ыоунг ман то бе алуаыс со гуардед анд
      цирцумспецт. ит ис веры офтен нотхинг бут оур оун ваниты тхат
      децеивес ус. уомен фанцы адмиратион меанс море тхан ит доес.”

      “анд мен таке царе тхат тхеы схоулд.”

      “иф ит ис десигнедлы доне, тхеы цаннот бе жустифиед; бут и хаве
      но идеа оф тхере беинг со муцх десигн ин тхе уорлд ас соме
      персонс имагине.”

      “и ам фар фром аттрибутинг аны парт оф мр. бинглеы’с цондуцт то
      десигн,” саид елизабетх; “бут уитхоут сцхеминг то до уронг, ор то
      маке отхерс унхаппы, тхере маы бе еррор, анд тхере маы бе мисеры.
      тхоугхтлесснесс, уант оф аттентион то отхер пеопле’с феелингс,
      анд уант оф ресолутион, уилл до тхе бусинесс.”

      “анд до ыоу импуте ит то еитхер оф тхосе?”

      “ыес; то тхе ласт. бут иф и го он, и схалл дисплеасе ыоу бы
      саыинг ухат и тхинк оф персонс ыоу естеем. стоп ме ухилст ыоу
      цан.”

      “ыоу персист, тхен, ин суппосинг хис систерс инфлуенце хим?”

      “ыес, ин цонжунцтион уитх хис фриенд.”

      “и цаннот белиеве ит. ухы схоулд тхеы тры то инфлуенце хим? тхеы
      цан онлы уисх хис хаппинесс; анд иф хе ис аттацхед то ме, но
      отхер уоман цан сецуре ит.”

      “ыоур фирст поситион ис фалсе. тхеы маы уисх маны тхингс бесидес
      хис хаппинесс; тхеы маы уисх хис инцреасе оф уеалтх анд
      цонсекууенце; тхеы маы уисх хим то марры а гирл ухо хас алл тхе
      импортанце оф монеы, греат цоннецтионс, анд приде.”

      “беыонд а доубт, тхеы до уисх хим то цхоосе мисс дарцы,” реплиед
      жане; “бут тхис маы бе фром беттер феелингс тхан ыоу аре
      суппосинг. тхеы хаве кноун хер муцх лонгер тхан тхеы хаве кноун
      ме; но уондер иф тхеы лове хер беттер. бут, ухатевер маы бе тхеир
      оун уисхес, ит ис веры унликелы тхеы схоулд хаве оппосед тхеир
      бротхер’с. ухат систер уоулд тхинк херселф ат либерты то до ит,
      унлесс тхере уере сометхинг веры обжецтионабле? иф тхеы белиевед
      хим аттацхед то ме, тхеы уоулд нот тры то парт ус; иф хе уере со,
      тхеы цоулд нот суццеед. бы суппосинг суцх ан аффецтион, ыоу маке
      еверыбоды ацтинг уннатураллы анд уронг, анд ме мост унхаппы. до
      нот дистресс ме бы тхе идеа. и ам нот асхамед оф хавинг беен
      мистакен—ор, ат леаст, ит ис лигхт, ит ис нотхинг ин цомпарисон
      оф ухат и схоулд феел ин тхинкинг илл оф хим ор хис систерс. лет
      ме таке ит ин тхе бест лигхт, ин тхе лигхт ин ухицх ит маы бе
      ундерстоод.”

      елизабетх цоулд нот оппосе суцх а уисх; анд фром тхис тиме мр.
      бинглеы’с наме уас сцарцелы евер ментионед бетуеен тхем.

      мрс. беннет стилл цонтинуед то уондер анд репине ат хис ретурнинг
      но море, анд тхоугх а даы селдом пассед ин ухицх елизабетх дид
      нот аццоунт фор ит цлеарлы, тхере уас литтле цханце оф хер евер
      цонсидеринг ит уитх лесс перплекситы. хер даугхтер ендеавоуред то
      цонвинце хер оф ухат схе дид нот белиеве херселф, тхат хис
      аттентионс то жане хад беен мерелы тхе еффецт оф а цоммон анд
      трансиент ликинг, ухицх цеасед ухен хе сау хер но море; бут
      тхоугх тхе пробабилиты оф тхе статемент уас адмиттед ат тхе тиме,
      схе хад тхе саме сторы то репеат еверы даы. мрс. беннет’с бест
      цомфорт уас тхат мр. бинглеы муст бе доун агаин ин тхе суммер.

      мр. беннет треатед тхе маттер дифферентлы. “со, лиззы,” саид хе
      оне даы, “ыоур систер ис цроссед ин лове, и финд. и цонгратулате
      хер. некст то беинг марриед, а гирл ликес то бе цроссед а литтле
      ин лове ноу анд тхен. ит ис сометхинг то тхинк оф, анд ит гивес
      хер а сорт оф дистинцтион амонг хер цомпанионс. ухен ис ыоур турн
      то цоме? ыоу уилл хардлы беар то бе лонг оутдоне бы жане. ноу ис
      ыоур тиме. хере аре оффицерс еноугх ин мерытон то дисаппоинт алл
      тхе ыоунг ладиес ин тхе цоунтры. лет уицкхам бе ыоур ман. хе ис а
      плеасант феллоу, анд уоулд жилт ыоу цредитаблы.”

      “тханк ыоу, сир, бут а лесс агрееабле ман уоулд сатисфы ме. уе
      муст нот алл експецт жане’с гоод фортуне.”

      “труе,” саид мр. беннет, “бут ит ис а цомфорт то тхинк тхат
      ухатевер оф тхат кинд маы бефалл ыоу, ыоу хаве ан аффецтионате
      мотхер ухо уилл маке тхе мост оф ит.”

      мр. уицкхам’с социеты уас оф материал сервице ин диспеллинг тхе
      глоом ухицх тхе лате перверсе оццурренцес хад тхроун он маны оф
      тхе лонгбоурн фамилы. тхеы сау хим офтен, анд то хис отхер
      рецоммендатионс уас ноу аддед тхат оф генерал унресерве. тхе
      ухоле оф ухат елизабетх хад алреады хеард, хис цлаимс он мр.
      дарцы, анд алл тхат хе хад суфферед фром хим, уас ноу опенлы
      ацкноуледгед анд публицлы цанвассед; анд еверыбоды уас плеасед то
      кноу хоу муцх тхеы хад алуаыс дисликед мр. дарцы бефоре тхеы хад
      кноун анытхинг оф тхе маттер.

      мисс беннет уас тхе онлы цреатуре ухо цоулд суппосе тхере мигхт
      бе аны екстенуатинг цирцумстанцес ин тхе цасе, ункноун то тхе
      социеты оф хертфордсхире; хер милд анд стеады цандоур алуаыс
      плеадед фор аллоуанцес, анд ургед тхе поссибилиты оф мистакес—бут
      бы еверыбоды елсе мр. дарцы уас цондемнед ас тхе уорст оф мен.




      цхаптер 25

      афтер а уеек спент ин профессионс оф лове анд сцхемес оф
      фелициты, мр. цоллинс уас цаллед фром хис амиабле цхарлотте бы
      тхе арривал оф сатурдаы. тхе паин оф сепаратион, хоуевер, мигхт
      бе аллевиатед он хис сиде, бы препаратионс фор тхе рецептион оф
      хис бриде; ас хе хад реасон то хопе, тхат схортлы афтер хис
      ретурн инто хертфордсхире, тхе даы уоулд бе фиксед тхат уас то
      маке хим тхе хаппиест оф мен. хе тоок леаве оф хис релатионс ат
      лонгбоурн уитх ас муцх солемниты ас бефоре; уисхед хис фаир
      цоусинс хеалтх анд хаппинесс агаин, анд промисед тхеир фатхер
      анотхер леттер оф тханкс.

      он тхе фоллоуинг мондаы, мрс. беннет хад тхе плеасуре оф
      рецеивинг хер бротхер анд хис уифе, ухо цаме ас усуал то спенд
      тхе цхристмас ат лонгбоурн. мр. гардинер уас а сенсибле,
      гентлеманлике ман, греатлы супериор то хис систер, ас уелл бы
      натуре ас едуцатион. тхе нетхерфиелд ладиес уоулд хаве хад
      диффицулты ин белиевинг тхат а ман ухо ливед бы траде, анд уитхин
      виеу оф хис оун уарехоусес, цоулд хаве беен со уелл-бред анд
      агрееабле. мрс. гардинер, ухо уас северал ыеарс ыоунгер тхан мрс.
      беннет анд мрс. пхиллипс, уас ан амиабле, интеллигент, елегант
      уоман, анд а греат фавоурите уитх алл хер лонгбоурн ниецес.
      бетуеен тхе туо елдест анд херселф еспециаллы, тхере субсистед а
      партицулар регард. тхеы хад фрекууентлы беен стаыинг уитх хер ин
      тоун.

      тхе фирст парт оф мрс. гардинер’с бусинесс он хер арривал уас то
      дистрибуте хер пресентс анд десцрибе тхе неуест фасхионс. ухен
      тхис уас доне схе хад а лесс ацтиве парт то плаы. ит бецаме хер
      турн то листен. мрс. беннет хад маны гриеванцес то релате, анд
      муцх то цомплаин оф. тхеы хад алл беен веры илл-усед синце схе
      ласт сау хер систер. туо оф хер гирлс хад беен упон тхе поинт оф
      марриаге, анд афтер алл тхере уас нотхинг ин ит.

      “и до нот бламе жане,” схе цонтинуед, “фор жане уоулд хаве гот
      мр. бинглеы иф схе цоулд. бут лиззы! ох, систер! ит ис веры хард
      то тхинк тхат схе мигхт хаве беен мр. цоллинс’с уифе бы тхис
      тиме, хад ит нот беен фор хер оун перверсенесс. хе маде хер ан
      оффер ин тхис веры роом, анд схе рефусед хим. тхе цонсекууенце оф
      ит ис, тхат лады луцас уилл хаве а даугхтер марриед бефоре и
      хаве, анд тхат тхе лонгбоурн естате ис жуст ас муцх ентаилед ас
      евер. тхе луцасес аре веры артфул пеопле индеед, систер. тхеы аре
      алл фор ухат тхеы цан гет. и ам сорры то саы ит оф тхем, бут со
      ит ис. ит макес ме веры нервоус анд поорлы, то бе тхуартед со ин
      мы оун фамилы, анд то хаве неигхбоурс ухо тхинк оф тхемселвес
      бефоре аныбоды елсе. хоуевер, ыоур цоминг жуст ат тхис тиме ис
      тхе греатест оф цомфортс, анд и ам веры глад то хеар ухат ыоу
      телл ус, оф лонг слеевес.”

      мрс. гардинер, то ухом тхе цхиеф оф тхис неус хад беен гивен
      бефоре, ин тхе цоурсе оф жане анд елизабетх’с цорреспонденце уитх
      хер, маде хер систер а слигхт ансуер, анд, ин цомпассион то хер
      ниецес, турнед тхе цонверсатион.

      ухен алоне уитх елизабетх афтеруардс, схе споке море он тхе
      субжецт. “ит сеемс ликелы то хаве беен а десирабле матцх фор
      жане,” саид схе. “и ам сорры ит уент офф. бут тхесе тхингс хаппен
      со офтен! а ыоунг ман, суцх ас ыоу десцрибе мр. бинглеы, со
      еасилы фаллс ин лове уитх а претты гирл фор а феу уеекс, анд ухен
      аццидент сепаратес тхем, со еасилы форгетс хер, тхат тхесе сорт
      оф инцонсистенциес аре веры фрекууент.”

      “ан ексцеллент цонсолатион ин итс уаы,” саид елизабетх, “бут ит
      уилл нот до фор _ус_. уе до нот суффер бы аццидент. ит доес нот
      офтен хаппен тхат тхе интерференце оф фриендс уилл персуаде а
      ыоунг ман оф индепендент фортуне то тхинк но море оф а гирл ухом
      хе уас виолентлы ин лове уитх онлы а феу даыс бефоре.”

      “бут тхат експрессион оф ‘виолентлы ин лове’ ис со хацкнеыед, со
      доубтфул, со индефините, тхат ит гивес ме веры литтле идеа. ит ис
      ас офтен апплиед то феелингс ухицх арисе фром а халф-хоур’с
      ацкууаинтанце, ас то а реал, стронг аттацхмент. праы, хоу _виолент
      уас_ мр. бинглеы’с лове?”

      “и невер сау а море промисинг инцлинатион; хе уас гроуинг кууите
      инаттентиве то отхер пеопле, анд ухоллы енгроссед бы хер. еверы
      тиме тхеы мет, ит уас море децидед анд ремаркабле. ат хис оун
      балл хе оффендед туо ор тхрее ыоунг ладиес, бы нот аскинг тхем то
      данце; анд и споке то хим туице мыселф, уитхоут рецеивинг ан
      ансуер. цоулд тхере бе финер сымптомс? ис нот генерал инцивилиты
      тхе веры ессенце оф лове?”

      “ох, ыес!—оф тхат кинд оф лове ухицх и суппосе хим то хаве фелт.
      поор жане! и ам сорры фор хер, бецаусе, уитх хер диспоситион, схе
      маы нот гет овер ит иммедиателы. ит хад беттер хаве хаппенед то
      _ыоу_, лиззы; ыоу уоулд хаве лаугхед ыоурселф оут оф ит соонер.
      бут до ыоу тхинк схе уоулд бе преваилед упон то го бацк уитх ус?
      цханге оф сцене мигхт бе оф сервице—анд перхапс а литтле релиеф
      фром хоме маы бе ас усефул ас анытхинг.”

      елизабетх уас ексцеединглы плеасед уитх тхис пропосал, анд фелт
      персуадед оф хер систер’с реады ацкууиесценце.

      “и хопе,” аддед мрс. гардинер, “тхат но цонсидератион уитх регард
      то тхис ыоунг ман уилл инфлуенце хер. уе ливе ин со дифферент а
      парт оф тоун, алл оур цоннецтионс аре со дифферент, анд, ас ыоу
      уелл кноу, уе го оут со литтле, тхат ит ис веры импробабле тхат
      тхеы схоулд меет ат алл, унлесс хе реаллы цомес то сее хер.”

      “анд _тхат_ ис кууите импоссибле; фор хе ис ноу ин тхе цустоды оф
      хис фриенд, анд мр. дарцы уоулд но море суффер хим то цалл он
      жане ин суцх а парт оф лондон! мы деар аунт, хоу цоулд ыоу тхинк
      оф ит? мр. дарцы маы перхапс хаве _хеард_ оф суцх а плаце ас
      грацецхурцх стреет, бут хе уоулд хардлы тхинк а монтх’с аблутион
      еноугх то цлеансе хим фром итс импуритиес, уере хе онце то ентер
      ит; анд депенд упон ит, мр. бинглеы невер стирс уитхоут хим.”

      “со муцх тхе беттер. и хопе тхеы уилл нот меет ат алл. бут доес
      нот жане цорреспонд уитх хис систер? _схе_ уилл нот бе абле то
      хелп цаллинг.”

      “схе уилл дроп тхе ацкууаинтанце ентирелы.”

      бут ин спите оф тхе цертаинты ин ухицх елизабетх аффецтед то
      плаце тхис поинт, ас уелл ас тхе стилл море интерестинг оне оф
      бинглеы’с беинг уитххелд фром сееинг жане, схе фелт а солицитуде
      он тхе субжецт ухицх цонвинцед хер, он ексаминатион, тхат схе дид
      нот цонсидер ит ентирелы хопелесс. ит уас поссибле, анд сометимес
      схе тхоугхт ит пробабле, тхат хис аффецтион мигхт бе реаниматед,
      анд тхе инфлуенце оф хис фриендс суццессфуллы цомбатед бы тхе
      море натурал инфлуенце оф жане’с аттрацтионс.

      мисс беннет аццептед хер аунт’с инвитатион уитх плеасуре; анд тхе
      бинглеыс уере но отхеруисе ин хер тхоугхтс ат тхе саме тиме, тхан
      ас схе хопед бы царолине’с нот ливинг ин тхе саме хоусе уитх хер
      бротхер, схе мигхт оццасионаллы спенд а морнинг уитх хер, уитхоут
      аны дангер оф сееинг хим.

      тхе гардинерс стаыед а уеек ат лонгбоурн; анд ухат уитх тхе
      пхиллипсес, тхе луцасес, анд тхе оффицерс, тхере уас нот а даы
      уитхоут итс енгагемент. мрс. беннет хад со царефуллы провидед фор
      тхе ентертаинмент оф хер бротхер анд систер, тхат тхеы дид нот
      онце сит доун то а фамилы диннер. ухен тхе енгагемент уас фор
      хоме, соме оф тхе оффицерс алуаыс маде парт оф ит—оф ухицх
      оффицерс мр. уицкхам уас суре то бе оне; анд он тхесе оццасионс,
      мрс. гардинер, рендеред суспициоус бы елизабетх’с уарм
      цоммендатион, нарроулы обсервед тхем ботх. уитхоут суппосинг
      тхем, фром ухат схе сау, то бе веры сериоуслы ин лове, тхеир
      преференце оф еацх отхер уас плаин еноугх то маке хер а литтле
      унеасы; анд схе ресолвед то спеак то елизабетх он тхе субжецт
      бефоре схе лефт хертфордсхире, анд репресент то хер тхе
      импруденце оф енцоурагинг суцх ан аттацхмент.

      то мрс. гардинер, уицкхам хад оне меанс оф аффординг плеасуре,
      унцоннецтед уитх хис генерал поуерс. абоут тен ор а дозен ыеарс
      аго, бефоре хер марриаге, схе хад спент а цонсидерабле тиме ин
      тхат веры парт оф дербысхире то ухицх хе белонгед. тхеы хад,
      тхерефоре, маны ацкууаинтанцес ин цоммон; анд тхоугх уицкхам хад
      беен литтле тхере синце тхе деатх оф дарцы’с фатхер, ит уас ыет
      ин хис поуер то гиве хер фресхер интеллигенце оф хер формер
      фриендс тхан схе хад беен ин тхе уаы оф процуринг.

      мрс. гардинер хад сеен пемберлеы, анд кноун тхе лате мр. дарцы бы
      цхарацтер перфецтлы уелл. хере цонсекууентлы уас ан инексхаустибле
      субжецт оф дисцоурсе. ин цомпаринг хер рецоллецтион оф пемберлеы
      уитх тхе минуте десцриптион ухицх уицкхам цоулд гиве, анд ин
      бестоуинг хер трибуте оф праисе он тхе цхарацтер оф итс лате
      поссессор, схе уас делигхтинг ботх хим анд херселф. он беинг маде
      ацкууаинтед уитх тхе пресент мр. дарцы’с треатмент оф хим, схе
      триед то ремембер соме оф тхат гентлеман’с репутед диспоситион
      ухен кууите а лад ухицх мигхт агрее уитх ит, анд уас цонфидент ат
      ласт тхат схе рецоллецтед хавинг хеард мр. фитзуиллиам дарцы
      формерлы спокен оф ас а веры проуд, илл-натуред боы.




      цхаптер 26

      мрс. гардинер’с цаутион то елизабетх уас пунцтуаллы анд киндлы
      гивен он тхе фирст фавоурабле оппортуниты оф спеакинг то хер
      алоне; афтер хонестлы теллинг хер ухат схе тхоугхт, схе тхус уент
      он:

      “ыоу аре тоо сенсибле а гирл, лиззы, то фалл ин лове мерелы
      бецаусе ыоу аре уарнед агаинст ит; анд, тхерефоре, и ам нот
      афраид оф спеакинг опенлы. сериоуслы, и уоулд хаве ыоу бе он ыоур
      гуард. до нот инволве ыоурселф ор ендеавоур то инволве хим ин ан
      аффецтион ухицх тхе уант оф фортуне уоулд маке со веры импрудент.
      и хаве нотхинг то саы агаинст _хим_; хе ис а мост интерестинг
      ыоунг ман; анд иф хе хад тхе фортуне хе оугхт то хаве, и схоулд
      тхинк ыоу цоулд нот до беттер. бут ас ит ис, ыоу муст нот лет
      ыоур фанцы рун ауаы уитх ыоу. ыоу хаве сенсе, анд уе алл експецт
      ыоу то усе ит. ыоур фатхер уоулд депенд он _ыоур_ ресолутион анд
      гоод цондуцт, и ам суре. ыоу муст нот дисаппоинт ыоур фатхер.”

      “мы деар аунт, тхис ис беинг сериоус индеед.”

      “ыес, анд и хопе то енгаге ыоу то бе сериоус ликеуисе.”

      “уелл, тхен, ыоу неед нот бе ундер аны аларм. и уилл таке царе оф
      мыселф, анд оф мр. уицкхам тоо. хе схалл нот бе ин лове уитх ме,
      иф и цан превент ит.”

      “елизабетх, ыоу аре нот сериоус ноу.”

      “и бег ыоур пардон, и уилл тры агаин. ат пресент и ам нот ин лове
      уитх мр. уицкхам; но, и цертаинлы ам нот. бут хе ис, беыонд алл
      цомпарисон, тхе мост агрееабле ман и евер сау—анд иф хе бецомес
      реаллы аттацхед то ме—и белиеве ит уилл бе беттер тхат хе схоулд
      нот. и сее тхе импруденце оф ит. ох! _тхат_ абоминабле мр. дарцы!
      мы фатхер’с опинион оф ме доес ме тхе греатест хоноур, анд и
      схоулд бе мисерабле то форфеит ит. мы фатхер, хоуевер, ис партиал
      то мр. уицкхам. ин схорт, мы деар аунт, и схоулд бе веры сорры то
      бе тхе меанс оф макинг аны оф ыоу унхаппы; бут синце уе сее еверы
      даы тхат ухере тхере ис аффецтион, ыоунг пеопле аре селдом
      уитххелд бы иммедиате уант оф фортуне фром ентеринг инто
      енгагементс уитх еацх отхер, хоу цан и промисе то бе уисер тхан
      со маны оф мы феллоу-цреатурес иф и ам темптед, ор хоу ам и евен
      то кноу тхат ит уоулд бе уисдом то ресист? алл тхат и цан промисе
      ыоу, тхерефоре, ис нот то бе ин а хурры. и уилл нот бе ин а хурры
      то белиеве мыселф хис фирст обжецт. ухен и ам ин цомпаны уитх
      хим, и уилл нот бе уисхинг. ин схорт, и уилл до мы бест.”

      “перхапс ит уилл бе ас уелл иф ыоу дисцоураге хис цоминг хере со
      веры офтен. ат леаст, ыоу схоулд нот _реминд_ ыоур мотхер оф
      инвитинг хим.”

      “ас и дид тхе отхер даы,” саид елизабетх уитх а цонсциоус смиле:
      “веры труе, ит уилл бе уисе ин ме то рефраин фром _тхат_. бут до
      нот имагине тхат хе ис алуаыс хере со офтен. ит ис он ыоур
      аццоунт тхат хе хас беен со фрекууентлы инвитед тхис уеек. ыоу
      кноу мы мотхер’с идеас ас то тхе нецесситы оф цонстант цомпаны
      фор хер фриендс. бут реаллы, анд упон мы хоноур, и уилл тры то до
      ухат и тхинк то бе тхе уисест; анд ноу и хопе ыоу аре сатисфиед.”

      хер аунт ассуред хер тхат схе уас, анд елизабетх хавинг тханкед
      хер фор тхе кинднесс оф хер хинтс, тхеы партед; а уондерфул
      инстанце оф адвице беинг гивен он суцх а поинт, уитхоут беинг
      ресентед.

      мр. цоллинс ретурнед инто хертфордсхире соон афтер ит хад беен
      кууиттед бы тхе гардинерс анд жане; бут ас хе тоок уп хис абоде
      уитх тхе луцасес, хис арривал уас но греат инцонвениенце то мрс.
      беннет. хис марриаге уас ноу фаст аппроацхинг, анд схе уас ат
      ленгтх со фар ресигнед ас то тхинк ит иневитабле, анд евен
      репеатедлы то саы, ин ан илл-натуред тоне, тхат схе “_уисхед_
      тхеы мигхт бе хаппы.” тхурсдаы уас то бе тхе уеддинг даы, анд он
      уеднесдаы мисс луцас паид хер фареуелл висит; анд ухен схе росе
      то таке леаве, елизабетх, асхамед оф хер мотхер’с унграциоус анд
      релуцтант гоод уисхес, анд синцерелы аффецтед херселф,
      аццомпаниед хер оут оф тхе роом. ас тхеы уент доунстаирс
      тогетхер, цхарлотте саид:

      “и схалл депенд он хеаринг фром ыоу веры офтен, елиза.”

      “_тхат_ ыоу цертаинлы схалл.”

      “анд и хаве анотхер фавоур то аск ыоу. уилл ыоу цоме анд сее ме?”

      “уе схалл офтен меет, и хопе, ин хертфордсхире.”

      “и ам нот ликелы то леаве кент фор соме тиме. промисе ме,
      тхерефоре, то цоме то хунсфорд.”

      елизабетх цоулд нот рефусе, тхоугх схе форесау литтле плеасуре ин
      тхе висит.

      “мы фатхер анд мариа аре цоминг то ме ин марцх,” аддед цхарлотте,
      “анд и хопе ыоу уилл цонсент то бе оф тхе парты. индеед, елиза,
      ыоу уилл бе ас уелцоме ас еитхер оф тхем.”

      тхе уеддинг тоок плаце; тхе бриде анд бридегроом сет офф фор кент
      фром тхе цхурцх доор, анд еверыбоды хад ас муцх то саы, ор то
      хеар, он тхе субжецт ас усуал. елизабетх соон хеард фром хер
      фриенд; анд тхеир цорреспонденце уас ас регулар анд фрекууент ас
      ит хад евер беен; тхат ит схоулд бе екууаллы унресервед уас
      импоссибле. елизабетх цоулд невер аддресс хер уитхоут феелинг
      тхат алл тхе цомфорт оф интимацы уас овер, анд тхоугх детерминед
      нот то слацкен ас а цорреспондент, ит уас фор тхе саке оф ухат
      хад беен, ратхер тхан ухат уас. цхарлотте’с фирст леттерс уере
      рецеивед уитх а гоод деал оф еагернесс; тхере цоулд нот бут бе
      цуриоситы то кноу хоу схе уоулд спеак оф хер неу хоме, хоу схе
      уоулд лике лады цатхерине, анд хоу хаппы схе уоулд даре проноунце
      херселф то бе; тхоугх, ухен тхе леттерс уере реад, елизабетх фелт
      тхат цхарлотте експрессед херселф он еверы поинт ексацтлы ас схе
      мигхт хаве форесеен. схе уроте цхеерфуллы, сеемед сурроундед уитх
      цомфортс, анд ментионед нотхинг ухицх схе цоулд нот праисе. тхе
      хоусе, фурнитуре, неигхбоурхоод, анд роадс, уере алл то хер
      тасте, анд лады цатхерине’с бехавиоур уас мост фриендлы анд
      облигинг. ит уас мр. цоллинс’с пицтуре оф хунсфорд анд росингс
      ратионаллы софтенед; анд елизабетх перцеивед тхат схе муст уаит
      фор хер оун висит тхере то кноу тхе рест.

      жане хад алреады уриттен а феу линес то хер систер то анноунце
      тхеир сафе арривал ин лондон; анд ухен схе уроте агаин, елизабетх
      хопед ит уоулд бе ин хер поуер то саы сометхинг оф тхе бинглеыс.

      хер импатиенце фор тхис сецонд леттер уас ас уелл реуардед ас
      импатиенце генераллы ис. жане хад беен а уеек ин тоун уитхоут
      еитхер сееинг ор хеаринг фром царолине. схе аццоунтед фор ит,
      хоуевер, бы суппосинг тхат хер ласт леттер то хер фриенд фром
      лонгбоурн хад бы соме аццидент беен лост.

      “мы аунт,” схе цонтинуед, “ис гоинг то-морроу инто тхат парт оф
      тхе тоун, анд и схалл таке тхе оппортуниты оф цаллинг ин
      гросвенор стреет.”

      схе уроте агаин ухен тхе висит уас паид, анд схе хад сеен мисс
      бинглеы. “и дид нот тхинк царолине ин спиритс,” уере хер уордс,
      “бут схе уас веры глад то сее ме, анд репроацхед ме фор гивинг
      хер но нотице оф мы цоминг то лондон. и уас ригхт, тхерефоре, мы
      ласт леттер хад невер реацхед хер. и инкууиред афтер тхеир
      бротхер, оф цоурсе. хе уас уелл, бут со муцх енгагед уитх мр.
      дарцы тхат тхеы сцарцелы евер сау хим. и фоунд тхат мисс дарцы
      уас експецтед то диннер. и уисх и цоулд сее хер. мы висит уас нот
      лонг, ас царолине анд мрс. хурст уере гоинг оут. и даре саы и
      схалл сее тхем соон хере.”

      елизабетх схоок хер хеад овер тхис леттер. ит цонвинцед хер тхат
      аццидент онлы цоулд дисцовер то мр. бинглеы хер систер’с беинг ин
      тоун.

      фоур уеекс пассед ауаы, анд жане сау нотхинг оф хим. схе
      ендеавоуред то персуаде херселф тхат схе дид нот регрет ит; бут
      схе цоулд но лонгер бе блинд то мисс бинглеы’с инаттентион. афтер
      уаитинг ат хоме еверы морнинг фор а фортнигхт, анд инвентинг
      еверы евенинг а фресх ексцусе фор хер, тхе виситор дид ат ласт
      аппеар; бут тхе схортнесс оф хер стаы, анд ыет море, тхе
      алтератион оф хер маннер уоулд аллоу жане то децеиве херселф но
      лонгер. тхе леттер ухицх схе уроте он тхис оццасион то хер систер
      уилл прове ухат схе фелт.

      “мы деарест лиззы уилл, и ам суре, бе инцапабле оф триумпхинг ин
      хер беттер жудгемент, ат мы експенсе, ухен и цонфесс мыселф то
      хаве беен ентирелы децеивед ин мисс бинглеы’с регард фор ме. бут,
      мы деар систер, тхоугх тхе евент хас провед ыоу ригхт, до нот
      тхинк ме обстинате иф и стилл ассерт тхат, цонсидеринг ухат хер
      бехавиоур уас, мы цонфиденце уас ас натурал ас ыоур суспицион. и
      до нот ат алл цомпрехенд хер реасон фор уисхинг то бе интимате
      уитх ме; бут иф тхе саме цирцумстанцес уере то хаппен агаин, и ам
      суре и схоулд бе децеивед агаин. царолине дид нот ретурн мы висит
      тилл ыестердаы; анд нот а ноте, нот а лине, дид и рецеиве ин тхе
      меантиме. ухен схе дид цоме, ит уас веры евидент тхат схе хад но
      плеасуре ин ит; схе маде а слигхт, формал апологы, фор нот
      цаллинг бефоре, саид нот а уорд оф уисхинг то сее ме агаин, анд
      уас ин еверы респецт со алтеред а цреатуре, тхат ухен схе уент
      ауаы и уас перфецтлы ресолвед то цонтинуе тхе ацкууаинтанце но
      лонгер. и питы, тхоугх и цаннот хелп бламинг хер. схе уас веры
      уронг ин синглинг ме оут ас схе дид; и цан сафелы саы тхат еверы
      адванце то интимацы беган он хер сиде. бут и питы хер, бецаусе
      схе муст феел тхат схе хас беен ацтинг уронг, анд бецаусе и ам
      веры суре тхат анксиеты фор хер бротхер ис тхе цаусе оф ит. и неед
      нот експлаин мыселф фартхер; анд тхоугх _уе_ кноу тхис анксиеты то
      бе кууите неедлесс, ыет иф схе феелс ит, ит уилл еасилы аццоунт
      фор хер бехавиоур то ме; анд со десерведлы деар ас хе ис то хис
      систер, ухатевер анксиеты схе муст феел он хис бехалф ис натурал
      анд амиабле. и цаннот бут уондер, хоуевер, ат хер хавинг аны суцх
      феарс ноу, бецаусе, иф хе хад ат алл царед абоут ме, уе муст хаве
      мет, лонг аго. хе кноус оф мы беинг ин тоун, и ам цертаин, фром
      сометхинг схе саид херселф; анд ыет ит уоулд сеем, бы хер маннер
      оф талкинг, ас иф схе уантед то персуаде херселф тхат хе ис
      реаллы партиал то мисс дарцы. и цаннот ундерстанд ит. иф и уере
      нот афраид оф жудгинг харсхлы, и схоулд бе алмост темптед то саы
      тхат тхере ис а стронг аппеаранце оф дуплициты ин алл тхис. бут и
      уилл ендеавоур то банисх еверы паинфул тхоугхт, анд тхинк онлы оф
      ухат уилл маке ме хаппы—ыоур аффецтион, анд тхе инвариабле
      кинднесс оф мы деар унцле анд аунт. лет ме хеар фром ыоу веры
      соон. мисс бинглеы саид сометхинг оф хис невер ретурнинг то
      нетхерфиелд агаин, оф гивинг уп тхе хоусе, бут нот уитх аны
      цертаинты. уе хад беттер нот ментион ит. и ам екстремелы глад тхат
      ыоу хаве суцх плеасант аццоунтс фром оур фриендс ат хунсфорд.
      праы го то сее тхем, уитх сир уиллиам анд мариа. и ам суре ыоу
      уилл бе веры цомфортабле тхере.—ыоурс, етц.”

      тхис леттер гаве елизабетх соме паин; бут хер спиритс ретурнед ас
      схе цонсидеред тхат жане уоулд но лонгер бе дупед, бы тхе систер
      ат леаст. алл експецтатион фром тхе бротхер уас ноу абсолутелы
      овер. схе уоулд нот евен уисх фор а ренеуал оф хис аттентионс.
      хис цхарацтер сунк он еверы ревиеу оф ит; анд ас а пунисхмент фор
      хим, ас уелл ас а поссибле адвантаге то жане, схе сериоуслы хопед
      хе мигхт реаллы соон марры мр. дарцы’с систер, ас бы уицкхам’с
      аццоунт, схе уоулд маке хим абундантлы регрет ухат хе хад тхроун
      ауаы.

      мрс. гардинер абоут тхис тиме реминдед елизабетх оф хер промисе
      цонцернинг тхат гентлеман, анд рекууиред информатион; анд
      елизабетх хад суцх то сенд ас мигхт ратхер гиве цонтентмент то
      хер аунт тхан то херселф. хис аппарент партиалиты хад субсидед,
      хис аттентионс уере овер, хе уас тхе адмирер оф соме оне елсе.
      елизабетх уас уатцхфул еноугх то сее ит алл, бут схе цоулд сее ит
      анд урите оф ит уитхоут материал паин. хер хеарт хад беен бут
      слигхтлы тоуцхед, анд хер ваниты уас сатисфиед уитх белиевинг
      тхат _схе_ уоулд хаве беен хис онлы цхоице, хад фортуне пермиттед
      ит. тхе судден ацкууиситион оф тен тхоусанд поундс уас тхе мост
      ремаркабле цхарм оф тхе ыоунг лады то ухом хе уас ноу рендеринг
      химселф агрееабле; бут елизабетх, лесс цлеар-сигхтед перхапс ин
      тхис цасе тхан ин цхарлотте’с, дид нот кууаррел уитх хим фор хис
      уисх оф индепенденце. нотхинг, он тхе цонтрары, цоулд бе море
      натурал; анд ухиле абле то суппосе тхат ит цост хим а феу
      стругглес то релинкууисх хер, схе уас реады то аллоу ит а уисе анд
      десирабле меасуре фор ботх, анд цоулд веры синцерелы уисх хим
      хаппы.

      алл тхис уас ацкноуледгед то мрс. гардинер; анд афтер релатинг
      тхе цирцумстанцес, схе тхус уент он: “и ам ноу цонвинцед, мы деар
      аунт, тхат и хаве невер беен муцх ин лове; фор хад и реаллы
      експериенцед тхат пуре анд елеватинг пассион, и схоулд ат пресент
      детест хис веры наме, анд уисх хим алл маннер оф евил. бут мы
      феелингс аре нот онлы цордиал тоуардс _хим_; тхеы аре евен
      импартиал тоуардс мисс кинг. и цаннот финд оут тхат и хате хер ат
      алл, ор тхат и ам ин тхе леаст унуиллинг то тхинк хер а веры гоод
      сорт оф гирл. тхере цан бе но лове ин алл тхис. мы уатцхфулнесс
      хас беен еффецтуал; анд тхоугх и цертаинлы схоулд бе а море
      интерестинг обжецт то алл мы ацкууаинтанцес уере и дистрацтедлы ин
      лове уитх хим, и цаннот саы тхат и регрет мы цомпаративе
      инсигнифицанце. импортанце маы сометимес бе пурцхасед тоо деарлы.
      китты анд лыдиа таке хис дефецтион муцх море то хеарт тхан и до.
      тхеы аре ыоунг ин тхе уаыс оф тхе уорлд, анд нот ыет опен то тхе
      мортифыинг цонвицтион тхат хандсоме ыоунг мен муст хаве сометхинг
      то ливе он ас уелл ас тхе плаин.”




      цхаптер 27

      уитх но греатер евентс тхан тхесе ин тхе лонгбоурн фамилы, анд
      отхеруисе диверсифиед бы литтле беыонд тхе уалкс то мерытон,
      сометимес дирты анд сометимес цолд, дид жануары анд фебруары пасс
      ауаы. марцх уас то таке елизабетх то хунсфорд. схе хад нот ат
      фирст тхоугхт веры сериоуслы оф гоинг тхитхер; бут цхарлотте, схе
      соон фоунд, уас депендинг он тхе план анд схе градуаллы леарнед
      то цонсидер ит херселф уитх греатер плеасуре ас уелл ас греатер
      цертаинты. абсенце хад инцреасед хер десире оф сееинг цхарлотте
      агаин, анд уеакенед хер дисгуст оф мр. цоллинс. тхере уас новелты
      ин тхе сцхеме, анд ас, уитх суцх а мотхер анд суцх
      унцомпанионабле систерс, хоме цоулд нот бе фаултлесс, а литтле
      цханге уас нот унуелцоме фор итс оун саке. тхе жоурнеы уоулд
      мореовер гиве хер а пееп ат жане; анд, ин схорт, ас тхе тиме дреу
      неар, схе уоулд хаве беен веры сорры фор аны делаы. еверытхинг,
      хоуевер, уент он смоотхлы, анд уас финаллы сеттлед аццординг то
      цхарлотте’с фирст скетцх. схе уас то аццомпаны сир уиллиам анд
      хис сецонд даугхтер. тхе импровемент оф спендинг а нигхт ин
      лондон уас аддед ин тиме, анд тхе план бецаме перфецт ас план
      цоулд бе.

      тхе онлы паин уас ин леавинг хер фатхер, ухо уоулд цертаинлы мисс
      хер, анд ухо, ухен ит цаме то тхе поинт, со литтле ликед хер
      гоинг, тхат хе толд хер то урите то хим, анд алмост промисед то
      ансуер хер леттер.

      тхе фареуелл бетуеен херселф анд мр. уицкхам уас перфецтлы
      фриендлы; он хис сиде евен море. хис пресент пурсуит цоулд нот
      маке хим форгет тхат елизабетх хад беен тхе фирст то ексците анд
      то десерве хис аттентион, тхе фирст то листен анд то питы, тхе
      фирст то бе адмиред; анд ин хис маннер оф биддинг хер адиеу,
      уисхинг хер еверы енжоымент, реминдинг хер оф ухат схе уас то
      експецт ин лады цатхерине де боургх, анд трустинг тхеир опинион оф
      хер—тхеир опинион оф еверыбоды—уоулд алуаыс цоинциде, тхере уас а
      солицитуде, ан интерест ухицх схе фелт муст евер аттацх хер то
      хим уитх а мост синцере регард; анд схе партед фром хим цонвинцед
      тхат, ухетхер марриед ор сингле, хе муст алуаыс бе хер модел оф
      тхе амиабле анд плеасинг.

      хер феллоу-травеллерс тхе некст даы уере нот оф а кинд то маке хер
      тхинк хим лесс агрееабле. сир уиллиам луцас, анд хис даугхтер
      мариа, а гоод-хумоуред гирл, бут ас емпты-хеадед ас химселф, хад
      нотхинг то саы тхат цоулд бе уортх хеаринг, анд уере листенед то
      уитх абоут ас муцх делигхт ас тхе раттле оф тхе цхаисе. елизабетх
      ловед абсурдитиес, бут схе хад кноун сир уиллиам’с тоо лонг. хе
      цоулд телл хер нотхинг неу оф тхе уондерс оф хис пресентатион анд
      книгхтхоод; анд хис цивилитиес уере уорн оут, лике хис
      информатион.

      ит уас а жоурнеы оф онлы туенты-фоур милес, анд тхеы беган ит со
      еарлы ас то бе ин грацецхурцх стреет бы ноон. ас тхеы дрове то
      мр. гардинер’с доор, жане уас ат а драуинг-роом уиндоу уатцхинг
      тхеир арривал; ухен тхеы ентеред тхе пассаге схе уас тхере то
      уелцоме тхем, анд елизабетх, лоокинг еарнестлы ин хер фаце, уас
      плеасед то сее ит хеалтхфул анд ловелы ас евер. он тхе стаирс
      уере а трооп оф литтле боыс анд гирлс, ухосе еагернесс фор тхеир
      цоусин’с аппеаранце уоулд нот аллоу тхем то уаит ин тхе
      драуинг-роом, анд ухосе схынесс, ас тхеы хад нот сеен хер фор а
      туелвемонтх, превентед тхеир цоминг лоуер. алл уас жоы анд
      кинднесс. тхе даы пассед мост плеасантлы ауаы; тхе морнинг ин
      бустле анд схоппинг, анд тхе евенинг ат оне оф тхе тхеатрес.

      елизабетх тхен цонтривед то сит бы хер аунт. тхеир фирст обжецт
      уас хер систер; анд схе уас море гриевед тхан астонисхед то хеар,
      ин реплы то хер минуте инкууириес, тхат тхоугх жане алуаыс
      стругглед то суппорт хер спиритс, тхере уере периодс оф
      дежецтион. ит уас реасонабле, хоуевер, то хопе тхат тхеы уоулд
      нот цонтинуе лонг. мрс. гардинер гаве хер тхе партицуларс алсо оф
      мисс бинглеы’с висит ин грацецхурцх стреет, анд репеатед
      цонверсатионс оццурринг ат дифферент тимес бетуеен жане анд
      херселф, ухицх провед тхат тхе формер хад, фром хер хеарт, гивен
      уп тхе ацкууаинтанце.

      мрс. гардинер тхен раллиед хер ниеце он уицкхам’с десертион, анд
      цомплиментед хер он беаринг ит со уелл.

      “бут мы деар елизабетх,” схе аддед, “ухат сорт оф гирл ис мисс
      кинг? и схоулд бе сорры то тхинк оур фриенд мерценары.”

      “праы, мы деар аунт, ухат ис тхе дифференце ин матримониал
      аффаирс, бетуеен тхе мерценары анд тхе прудент мотиве? ухере доес
      дисцретион енд, анд аварице бегин? ласт цхристмас ыоу уере афраид
      оф хис маррыинг ме, бецаусе ит уоулд бе импрудент; анд ноу,
      бецаусе хе ис трыинг то гет а гирл уитх онлы тен тхоусанд поундс,
      ыоу уант то финд оут тхат хе ис мерценары.”

      “иф ыоу уилл онлы телл ме ухат сорт оф гирл мисс кинг ис, и схалл
      кноу ухат то тхинк.”

      “схе ис а веры гоод кинд оф гирл, и белиеве. и кноу но харм оф
      хер.”

      “бут хе паид хер нот тхе смаллест аттентион тилл хер
      грандфатхер’с деатх маде хер мистресс оф тхис фортуне.”

      “но—ухы схоулд хе? иф ит уере нот аллоуабле фор хим то гаин _мы_
      аффецтионс бецаусе и хад но монеы, ухат оццасион цоулд тхере бе
      фор макинг лове то а гирл ухом хе дид нот царе абоут, анд ухо уас
      екууаллы поор?”

      “бут тхере сеемс ан инделицацы ин дирецтинг хис аттентионс
      тоуардс хер со соон афтер тхис евент.”

      “а ман ин дистрессед цирцумстанцес хас нот тиме фор алл тхосе
      елегант децорумс ухицх отхер пеопле маы обсерве. иф _схе_ доес
      нот обжецт то ит, ухы схоулд _уе_?”

      “_хер_ нот обжецтинг доес нот жустифы _хим_. ит онлы схоус хер
      беинг дефициент ин сометхинг херселф—сенсе ор феелинг.”

      “уелл,” цриед елизабетх, “хаве ит ас ыоу цхоосе. _хе_ схалл бе
      мерценары, анд _схе_ схалл бе фоолисх.”

      “но, лиззы, тхат ис ухат и до _нот_ цхоосе. и схоулд бе сорры,
      ыоу кноу, то тхинк илл оф а ыоунг ман ухо хас ливед со лонг ин
      дербысхире.”

      “ох! иф тхат ис алл, и хаве а веры поор опинион оф ыоунг мен ухо
      ливе ин дербысхире; анд тхеир интимате фриендс ухо ливе ин
      хертфордсхире аре нот муцх беттер. и ам сицк оф тхем алл. тханк
      хеавен! и ам гоинг то-морроу ухере и схалл финд а ман ухо хас нот
      оне агрееабле кууалиты, ухо хас неитхер маннер нор сенсе то
      рецомменд хим. ступид мен аре тхе онлы онес уортх кноуинг, афтер
      алл.”

      “таке царе, лиззы; тхат спеецх савоурс стронглы оф
      дисаппоинтмент.”

      бефоре тхеы уере сепаратед бы тхе цонцлусион оф тхе плаы, схе хад
      тхе унекспецтед хаппинесс оф ан инвитатион то аццомпаны хер унцле
      анд аунт ин а тоур оф плеасуре ухицх тхеы пропосед такинг ин тхе
      суммер.

      “уе хаве нот детерминед хоу фар ит схалл царры ус,” саид мрс.
      гардинер, “бут, перхапс, то тхе лакес.”

      но сцхеме цоулд хаве беен море агрееабле то елизабетх, анд хер
      аццептанце оф тхе инвитатион уас мост реады анд гратефул. “ох, мы
      деар, деар аунт,” схе раптуроуслы цриед, “ухат делигхт! ухат
      фелициты! ыоу гиве ме фресх лифе анд вигоур. адиеу то
      дисаппоинтмент анд сплеен. ухат аре ыоунг мен то роцкс анд
      моунтаинс? ох! ухат хоурс оф транспорт уе схалл спенд! анд ухен
      уе _до_ ретурн, ит схалл нот бе лике отхер травеллерс, уитхоут
      беинг абле то гиве оне аццурате идеа оф анытхинг. уе _уилл_ кноу
      ухере уе хаве гоне—уе _уилл_ рецоллецт ухат уе хаве сеен. лакес,
      моунтаинс, анд риверс схалл нот бе жумблед тогетхер ин оур
      имагинатионс; нор ухен уе аттемпт то десцрибе аны партицулар
      сцене, уилл уе бегин кууаррелинг абоут итс релативе ситуатион. лет
      _оур_ фирст еффусионс бе лесс инсуппортабле тхан тхосе оф тхе
      генералиты оф травеллерс.”




      цхаптер 28

      еверы обжецт ин тхе некст даы’с жоурнеы уас неу анд интерестинг то
      елизабетх; анд хер спиритс уере ин а стате оф енжоымент; фор схе
      хад сеен хер систер лоокинг со уелл ас то банисх алл феар фор хер
      хеалтх, анд тхе проспецт оф хер нортхерн тоур уас а цонстант
      соурце оф делигхт.

      ухен тхеы лефт тхе хигх роад фор тхе лане то хунсфорд, еверы еые
      уас ин сеарцх оф тхе парсонаге, анд еверы турнинг експецтед то
      бринг ит ин виеу. тхе палингс оф росингс парк уас тхеир боундары
      он оне сиде. елизабетх смилед ат тхе рецоллецтион оф алл тхат схе
      хад хеард оф итс инхабитантс.

      ат ленгтх тхе парсонаге уас дисцернибле. тхе гарден слопинг то
      тхе роад, тхе хоусе стандинг ин ит, тхе греен палес, анд тхе
      лаурел хедге, еверытхинг децларед тхеы уере арривинг. мр. цоллинс
      анд цхарлотте аппеаред ат тхе доор, анд тхе царриаге стоппед ат
      тхе смалл гате ухицх лед бы а схорт гравел уалк то тхе хоусе,
      амидст тхе нодс анд смилес оф тхе ухоле парты. ин а момент тхеы
      уере алл оут оф тхе цхаисе, режоицинг ат тхе сигхт оф еацх отхер.
      мрс. цоллинс уелцомед хер фриенд уитх тхе ливелиест плеасуре, анд
      елизабетх уас море анд море сатисфиед уитх цоминг ухен схе фоунд
      херселф со аффецтионателы рецеивед. схе сау инстантлы тхат хер
      цоусин’с маннерс уере нот алтеред бы хис марриаге; хис формал
      цивилиты уас жуст ухат ит хад беен, анд хе детаинед хер соме
      минутес ат тхе гате то хеар анд сатисфы хис инкууириес афтер алл
      хер фамилы. тхеы уере тхен, уитх но отхер делаы тхан хис поинтинг
      оут тхе неатнесс оф тхе ентранце, такен инто тхе хоусе; анд ас
      соон ас тхеы уере ин тхе парлоур, хе уелцомед тхем а сецонд тиме,
      уитх остентатиоус формалиты то хис хумбле абоде, анд пунцтуаллы
      репеатед алл хис уифе’с офферс оф рефресхмент.

      елизабетх уас препаред то сее хим ин хис глоры; анд схе цоулд нот
      хелп ин фанцыинг тхат ин дисплаыинг тхе гоод пропортион оф тхе
      роом, итс аспецт анд итс фурнитуре, хе аддрессед химселф
      партицуларлы то хер, ас иф уисхинг то маке хер феел ухат схе хад
      лост ин рефусинг хим. бут тхоугх еверытхинг сеемед неат анд
      цомфортабле, схе уас нот абле то гратифы хим бы аны сигх оф
      репентанце, анд ратхер лоокед уитх уондер ат хер фриенд тхат схе
      цоулд хаве со цхеерфул ан аир уитх суцх а цомпанион. ухен мр.
      цоллинс саид анытхинг оф ухицх хис уифе мигхт реасонаблы бе
      асхамед, ухицх цертаинлы уас нот унселдом, схе инволунтарилы
      турнед хер еые он цхарлотте. онце ор туице схе цоулд дисцерн а
      фаинт блусх; бут ин генерал цхарлотте уиселы дид нот хеар. афтер
      ситтинг лонг еноугх то адмире еверы артицле оф фурнитуре ин тхе
      роом, фром тхе сидебоард то тхе фендер, то гиве ан аццоунт оф
      тхеир жоурнеы, анд оф алл тхат хад хаппенед ин лондон, мр.
      цоллинс инвитед тхем то таке а стролл ин тхе гарден, ухицх уас
      ларге анд уелл лаид оут, анд то тхе цултиватион оф ухицх хе
      аттендед химселф. то уорк ин тхис гарден уас оне оф хис мост
      респецтабле плеасурес; анд елизабетх адмиред тхе цомманд оф
      цоунтенанце уитх ухицх цхарлотте талкед оф тхе хеалтхфулнесс оф
      тхе ексерцисе, анд оунед схе енцоурагед ит ас муцх ас поссибле.
      хере, леадинг тхе уаы тхроугх еверы уалк анд цросс уалк, анд
      сцарцелы аллоуинг тхем ан интервал то уттер тхе праисес хе аскед
      фор, еверы виеу уас поинтед оут уитх а минутенесс ухицх лефт
      беауты ентирелы бехинд. хе цоулд нумбер тхе фиелдс ин еверы
      дирецтион, анд цоулд телл хоу маны треес тхере уере ин тхе мост
      дистант цлумп. бут оф алл тхе виеус ухицх хис гарден, ор ухицх
      тхе цоунтры ор кингдом цоулд боаст, ноне уере то бе цомпаред уитх
      тхе проспецт оф росингс, аффордед бы ан опенинг ин тхе треес тхат
      бордеред тхе парк неарлы оппосите тхе фронт оф хис хоусе. ит уас
      а хандсоме модерн буилдинг, уелл ситуатед он рисинг гроунд.

      фром хис гарден, мр. цоллинс уоулд хаве лед тхем роунд хис туо
      меадоус; бут тхе ладиес, нот хавинг схоес то енцоунтер тхе
      ремаинс оф а ухите фрост, турнед бацк; анд ухиле сир уиллиам
      аццомпаниед хим, цхарлотте тоок хер систер анд фриенд овер тхе
      хоусе, екстремелы уелл плеасед, пробаблы, то хаве тхе оппортуниты
      оф схоуинг ит уитхоут хер хусбанд’с хелп. ит уас ратхер смалл,
      бут уелл буилт анд цонвениент; анд еверытхинг уас фиттед уп анд
      аррангед уитх а неатнесс анд цонсистенцы оф ухицх елизабетх гаве
      цхарлотте алл тхе цредит. ухен мр. цоллинс цоулд бе форготтен,
      тхере уас реаллы ан аир оф греат цомфорт тхроугхоут, анд бы
      цхарлотте’с евидент енжоымент оф ит, елизабетх суппосед хе муст
      бе офтен форготтен.

      схе хад алреады леарнт тхат лады цатхерине уас стилл ин тхе
      цоунтры. ит уас спокен оф агаин ухиле тхеы уере ат диннер, ухен
      мр. цоллинс жоининг ин, обсервед:

      “ыес, мисс елизабетх, ыоу уилл хаве тхе хоноур оф сееинг лады
      цатхерине де боургх он тхе енсуинг сундаы ат цхурцх, анд и неед
      нот саы ыоу уилл бе делигхтед уитх хер. схе ис алл аффабилиты анд
      цондесценсион, анд и доубт нот бут ыоу уилл бе хоноуред уитх соме
      портион оф хер нотице ухен сервице ис овер. и хаве сцарцелы аны
      хеситатион ин саыинг схе уилл инцлуде ыоу анд мы систер мариа ин
      еверы инвитатион уитх ухицх схе хоноурс ус дуринг ыоур стаы хере.
      хер бехавиоур то мы деар цхарлотте ис цхарминг. уе дине ат
      росингс туице еверы уеек, анд аре невер аллоуед то уалк хоме. хер
      ладысхип’с царриаге ис регуларлы ордеред фор ус. и _схоулд_ саы,
      оне оф хер ладысхип’с царриагес, фор схе хас северал.”

      “лады цатхерине ис а веры респецтабле, сенсибле уоман индеед,”
      аддед цхарлотте, “анд а мост аттентиве неигхбоур.”

      “веры труе, мы деар, тхат ис ексацтлы ухат и саы. схе ис тхе сорт
      оф уоман ухом оне цаннот регард уитх тоо муцх деференце.”

      тхе евенинг уас спент цхиефлы ин талкинг овер хертфордсхире неус,
      анд теллинг агаин ухат хад алреады беен уриттен; анд ухен ит
      цлосед, елизабетх, ин тхе солитуде оф хер цхамбер, хад то
      медитате упон цхарлотте’с дегрее оф цонтентмент, то ундерстанд
      хер аддресс ин гуидинг, анд цомпосуре ин беаринг уитх, хер
      хусбанд, анд то ацкноуледге тхат ит уас алл доне веры уелл. схе
      хад алсо то антиципате хоу хер висит уоулд пасс, тхе кууиет тенор
      оф тхеир усуал емплоыментс, тхе вексатиоус интерруптионс оф мр.
      цоллинс, анд тхе гаиетиес оф тхеир интерцоурсе уитх росингс. а
      ливелы имагинатион соон сеттлед ит алл.

      абоут тхе миддле оф тхе некст даы, ас схе уас ин хер роом геттинг
      реады фор а уалк, а судден ноисе белоу сеемед то спеак тхе ухоле
      хоусе ин цонфусион; анд, афтер листенинг а момент, схе хеард
      сомебоды руннинг уп стаирс ин а виолент хурры, анд цаллинг лоудлы
      афтер хер. схе опенед тхе доор анд мет мариа ин тхе ландинг
      плаце, ухо, бреатхлесс уитх агитатион, цриед оут—

      “ох, мы деар елиза! праы маке хасте анд цоме инто тхе
      дининг-роом, фор тхере ис суцх а сигхт то бе сеен! и уилл нот
      телл ыоу ухат ит ис. маке хасте, анд цоме доун тхис момент.”

      елизабетх аскед кууестионс ин ваин; мариа уоулд телл хер нотхинг
      море, анд доун тхеы ран инто тхе дининг-роом, ухицх фронтед тхе
      лане, ин кууест оф тхис уондер; ит уас туо ладиес стоппинг ин а
      лоу пхаетон ат тхе гарден гате.

      “анд ис тхис алл?” цриед елизабетх. “и експецтед ат леаст тхат тхе
      пигс уере гот инто тхе гарден, анд хере ис нотхинг бут лады
      цатхерине анд хер даугхтер.”

      “ла! мы деар,” саид мариа, кууите схоцкед ат тхе мистаке, “ит ис
      нот лады цатхерине. тхе олд лады ис мрс. женкинсон, ухо ливес
      уитх тхем; тхе отхер ис мисс де боургх. онлы лоок ат хер. схе ис
      кууите а литтле цреатуре. ухо уоулд хаве тхоугхт тхат схе цоулд бе
      со тхин анд смалл?”

      “схе ис абоминаблы руде то кееп цхарлотте оут оф доорс ин алл
      тхис уинд. ухы доес схе нот цоме ин?”

      “ох, цхарлотте саыс схе хардлы евер доес. ит ис тхе греатест оф
      фавоурс ухен мисс де боургх цомес ин.”

      “и лике хер аппеаранце,” саид елизабетх, струцк уитх отхер идеас.
      “схе лоокс сицклы анд цросс. ыес, схе уилл до фор хим веры уелл.
      схе уилл маке хим а веры пропер уифе.”

      мр. цоллинс анд цхарлотте уере ботх стандинг ат тхе гате ин
      цонверсатион уитх тхе ладиес; анд сир уиллиам, то елизабетх’с
      хигх диверсион, уас статионед ин тхе дооруаы, ин еарнест
      цонтемплатион оф тхе греатнесс бефоре хим, анд цонстантлы боуинг
      ухеневер мисс де боургх лоокед тхат уаы.

      ат ленгтх тхере уас нотхинг море то бе саид; тхе ладиес дрове он,
      анд тхе отхерс ретурнед инто тхе хоусе. мр. цоллинс но соонер сау
      тхе туо гирлс тхан хе беган то цонгратулате тхем он тхеир гоод
      фортуне, ухицх цхарлотте експлаинед бы леттинг тхем кноу тхат тхе
      ухоле парты уас аскед то дине ат росингс тхе некст даы.




      цхаптер 29

      мр. цоллинс’с триумпх, ин цонсекууенце оф тхис инвитатион, уас
      цомплете. тхе поуер оф дисплаыинг тхе грандеур оф хис патронесс
      то хис уондеринг виситорс, анд оф леттинг тхем сее хер цивилиты
      тоуардс химселф анд хис уифе, уас ексацтлы ухат хе хад уисхед фор;
      анд тхат ан оппортуниты оф доинг ит схоулд бе гивен со соон, уас
      суцх ан инстанце оф лады цатхерине’с цондесценсион, ас хе кнеу
      нот хоу то адмире еноугх.

      “и цонфесс,” саид хе, “тхат и схоулд нот хаве беен ат алл
      сурприсед бы хер ладысхип’с аскинг ус он сундаы то дринк теа анд
      спенд тхе евенинг ат росингс. и ратхер експецтед, фром мы
      кноуледге оф хер аффабилиты, тхат ит уоулд хаппен. бут ухо цоулд
      хаве форесеен суцх ан аттентион ас тхис? ухо цоулд хаве имагинед
      тхат уе схоулд рецеиве ан инвитатион то дине тхере (ан
      инвитатион, мореовер, инцлудинг тхе ухоле парты) со иммедиателы
      афтер ыоур арривал!”

      “и ам тхе лесс сурприсед ат ухат хас хаппенед,” реплиед сир
      уиллиам, “фром тхат кноуледге оф ухат тхе маннерс оф тхе греат
      реаллы аре, ухицх мы ситуатион ин лифе хас аллоуед ме то ацкууире.
      абоут тхе цоурт, суцх инстанцес оф елегант бреединг аре нот
      унцоммон.”

      сцарцелы анытхинг уас талкед оф тхе ухоле даы ор некст морнинг бут
      тхеир висит то росингс. мр. цоллинс уас царефуллы инструцтинг
      тхем ин ухат тхеы уере то експецт, тхат тхе сигхт оф суцх роомс,
      со маны сервантс, анд со сплендид а диннер, мигхт нот ухоллы
      оверпоуер тхем.

      ухен тхе ладиес уере сепаратинг фор тхе тоилетте, хе саид то
      елизабетх—

      “до нот маке ыоурселф унеасы, мы деар цоусин, абоут ыоур аппарел.
      лады цатхерине ис фар фром рекууиринг тхат елеганце оф дресс ин ус
      ухицх бецомес херселф анд хер даугхтер. и уоулд адвисе ыоу мерелы
      то пут он ухатевер оф ыоур цлотхес ис супериор то тхе рест—тхере
      ис но оццасион фор анытхинг море. лады цатхерине уилл нот тхинк
      тхе уорсе оф ыоу фор беинг симплы дрессед. схе ликес то хаве тхе
      дистинцтион оф ранк пресервед.”

      ухиле тхеы уере дрессинг, хе цаме туо ор тхрее тимес то тхеир
      дифферент доорс, то рецомменд тхеир беинг кууицк, ас лады
      цатхерине веры муцх обжецтед то бе кепт уаитинг фор хер диннер.
      суцх формидабле аццоунтс оф хер ладысхип, анд хер маннер оф
      ливинг, кууите фригхтенед мариа луцас ухо хад беен литтле усед то
      цомпаны, анд схе лоокед форуард то хер интродуцтион ат росингс
      уитх ас муцх аппрехенсион ас хер фатхер хад доне то хис
      пресентатион ат ст. жамес’с.

      ас тхе уеатхер уас фине, тхеы хад а плеасант уалк оф абоут халф а
      миле ацросс тхе парк. еверы парк хас итс беауты анд итс
      проспецтс; анд елизабетх сау муцх то бе плеасед уитх, тхоугх схе
      цоулд нот бе ин суцх раптурес ас мр. цоллинс експецтед тхе сцене
      то инспире, анд уас бут слигхтлы аффецтед бы хис енумератион оф
      тхе уиндоус ин фронт оф тхе хоусе, анд хис релатион оф ухат тхе
      глазинг алтогетхер хад оригиналлы цост сир леуис де боургх.

      ухен тхеы асцендед тхе степс то тхе халл, мариа’с аларм уас еверы
      момент инцреасинг, анд евен сир уиллиам дид нот лоок перфецтлы
      цалм. елизабетх’с цоураге дид нот фаил хер. схе хад хеард нотхинг
      оф лады цатхерине тхат споке хер ауфул фром аны екстраординары
      талентс ор мирацулоус виртуе, анд тхе мере стателинесс оф монеы
      ор ранк схе тхоугхт схе цоулд уитнесс уитхоут трепидатион.

      фром тхе ентранце-халл, оф ухицх мр. цоллинс поинтед оут, уитх а
      раптуроус аир, тхе фине пропортион анд тхе финисхед орнаментс,
      тхеы фоллоуед тхе сервантс тхроугх ан анте-цхамбер, то тхе роом
      ухере лады цатхерине, хер даугхтер, анд мрс. женкинсон уере
      ситтинг. хер ладысхип, уитх греат цондесценсион, аросе то рецеиве
      тхем; анд ас мрс. цоллинс хад сеттлед ит уитх хер хусбанд тхат
      тхе оффице оф интродуцтион схоулд бе херс, ит уас перформед ин а
      пропер маннер, уитхоут аны оф тхосе апологиес анд тханкс ухицх хе
      уоулд хаве тхоугхт нецессары.

      ин спите оф хавинг беен ат ст. жамес’с, сир уиллиам уас со
      цомплетелы ауед бы тхе грандеур сурроундинг хим, тхат хе хад бут
      жуст цоураге еноугх то маке а веры лоу боу, анд таке хис сеат
      уитхоут саыинг а уорд; анд хис даугхтер, фригхтенед алмост оут оф
      хер сенсес, сат он тхе едге оф хер цхаир, нот кноуинг ухицх уаы
      то лоок. елизабетх фоунд херселф кууите екууал то тхе сцене, анд
      цоулд обсерве тхе тхрее ладиес бефоре хер цомпоседлы. лады
      цатхерине уас а талл, ларге уоман, уитх стронглы-маркед феатурес,
      ухицх мигхт онце хаве беен хандсоме. хер аир уас нот
      цонцилиатинг, нор уас хер маннер оф рецеивинг тхем суцх ас то
      маке хер виситорс форгет тхеир инфериор ранк. схе уас нот
      рендеред формидабле бы силенце; бут ухатевер схе саид уас спокен
      ин со аутхоритативе а тоне, ас маркед хер селф-импортанце, анд
      броугхт мр. уицкхам иммедиателы то елизабетх’с минд; анд фром тхе
      обсерватион оф тхе даы алтогетхер, схе белиевед лады цатхерине то
      бе ексацтлы ухат хе репресентед.

      ухен, афтер ексамининг тхе мотхер, ин ухосе цоунтенанце анд
      депортмент схе соон фоунд соме ресембланце оф мр. дарцы, схе
      турнед хер еыес он тхе даугхтер, схе цоулд алмост хаве жоинед ин
      мариа’с астонисхмент ат хер беинг со тхин анд со смалл. тхере уас
      неитхер ин фигуре нор фаце аны ликенесс бетуеен тхе ладиес. мисс
      де боургх уас пале анд сицклы; хер феатурес, тхоугх нот плаин,
      уере инсигнифицант; анд схе споке веры литтле, ексцепт ин а лоу
      воице, то мрс. женкинсон, ин ухосе аппеаранце тхере уас нотхинг
      ремаркабле, анд ухо уас ентирелы енгагед ин листенинг то ухат схе
      саид, анд плацинг а сцреен ин тхе пропер дирецтион бефоре хер
      еыес.

      афтер ситтинг а феу минутес, тхеы уере алл сент то оне оф тхе
      уиндоус то адмире тхе виеу, мр. цоллинс аттендинг тхем то поинт
      оут итс беаутиес, анд лады цатхерине киндлы информинг тхем тхат
      ит уас муцх беттер уортх лоокинг ат ин тхе суммер.

      тхе диннер уас ексцеединглы хандсоме, анд тхере уере алл тхе
      сервантс анд алл тхе артицлес оф плате ухицх мр. цоллинс хад
      промисед; анд, ас хе хад ликеуисе форетолд, хе тоок хис сеат ат
      тхе боттом оф тхе табле, бы хер ладысхип’с десире, анд лоокед ас
      иф хе фелт тхат лифе цоулд фурнисх нотхинг греатер. хе царвед,
      анд ате, анд праисед уитх делигхтед алацриты; анд еверы дисх уас
      цоммендед, фирст бы хим анд тхен бы сир уиллиам, ухо уас ноу
      еноугх рецоверед то ецхо ухатевер хис сон-ин-лау саид, ин а
      маннер ухицх елизабетх уондеред лады цатхерине цоулд беар. бут
      лады цатхерине сеемед гратифиед бы тхеир ексцессиве адмиратион,
      анд гаве мост грациоус смилес, еспециаллы ухен аны дисх он тхе
      табле провед а новелты то тхем. тхе парты дид нот супплы муцх
      цонверсатион. елизабетх уас реады то спеак ухеневер тхере уас ан
      опенинг, бут схе уас сеатед бетуеен цхарлотте анд мисс де
      боургх—тхе формер оф ухом уас енгагед ин листенинг то лады
      цатхерине, анд тхе латтер саид нот а уорд то хер алл диннер-тиме.
      мрс. женкинсон уас цхиефлы емплоыед ин уатцхинг хоу литтле мисс
      де боургх ате, прессинг хер то тры соме отхер дисх, анд феаринг
      схе уас индиспосед. мариа тхоугхт спеакинг оут оф тхе кууестион,
      анд тхе гентлемен дид нотхинг бут еат анд адмире.

      ухен тхе ладиес ретурнед то тхе драуинг-роом, тхере уас литтле то
      бе доне бут то хеар лады цатхерине талк, ухицх схе дид уитхоут
      аны интермиссион тилл цоффее цаме ин, деливеринг хер опинион он
      еверы субжецт ин со децисиве а маннер, ас провед тхат схе уас нот
      усед то хаве хер жудгемент цонтровертед. схе инкууиред инто
      цхарлотте’с доместиц цонцернс фамилиарлы анд минутелы, гаве хер а
      греат деал оф адвице ас то тхе манагемент оф тхем алл; толд хер
      хоу еверытхинг оугхт то бе регулатед ин со смалл а фамилы ас
      херс, анд инструцтед хер ас то тхе царе оф хер цоус анд хер
      поултры. елизабетх фоунд тхат нотхинг уас бенеатх тхис греат
      лады’с аттентион, ухицх цоулд фурнисх хер уитх ан оццасион оф
      дицтатинг то отхерс. ин тхе интервалс оф хер дисцоурсе уитх мрс.
      цоллинс, схе аддрессед а вариеты оф кууестионс то мариа анд
      елизабетх, бут еспециаллы то тхе латтер, оф ухосе цоннецтионс схе
      кнеу тхе леаст, анд ухо схе обсервед то мрс. цоллинс уас а веры
      гентеел, претты кинд оф гирл. схе аскед хер, ат дифферент тимес,
      хоу маны систерс схе хад, ухетхер тхеы уере олдер ор ыоунгер тхан
      херселф, ухетхер аны оф тхем уере ликелы то бе марриед, ухетхер
      тхеы уере хандсоме, ухере тхеы хад беен едуцатед, ухат царриаге
      хер фатхер кепт, анд ухат хад беен хер мотхер’с маиден наме?
      елизабетх фелт алл тхе импертиненце оф хер кууестионс бут ансуеред
      тхем веры цомпоседлы. лады цатхерине тхен обсервед,

      “ыоур фатхер’с естате ис ентаилед он мр. цоллинс, и тхинк. фор
      ыоур саке,” турнинг то цхарлотте, “и ам глад оф ит; бут отхеруисе
      и сее но оццасион фор ентаилинг естатес фром тхе фемале лине. ит
      уас нот тхоугхт нецессары ин сир леуис де боургх’с фамилы. до ыоу
      плаы анд синг, мисс беннет?”

      “а литтле.”

      “ох! тхен—соме тиме ор отхер уе схалл бе хаппы то хеар ыоу. оур
      инструмент ис а цапитал оне, пробаблы супериор то——ыоу схалл тры
      ит соме даы. до ыоур систерс плаы анд синг?”

      “оне оф тхем доес.”

      “ухы дид нот ыоу алл леарн? ыоу оугхт алл то хаве леарнед. тхе
      мисс уеббс алл плаы, анд тхеир фатхер хас нот со гоод ан инцоме
      ас ыоурс. до ыоу драу?”

      “но, нот ат алл.”

      “ухат, ноне оф ыоу?”

      “нот оне.”

      “тхат ис веры странге. бут и суппосе ыоу хад но оппортуниты. ыоур
      мотхер схоулд хаве такен ыоу то тоун еверы спринг фор тхе бенефит
      оф мастерс.”

      “мы мотхер уоулд хаве хад но обжецтион, бут мы фатхер хатес
      лондон.”

      “хас ыоур говернесс лефт ыоу?”

      “уе невер хад аны говернесс.”

      “но говернесс! хоу уас тхат поссибле? фиве даугхтерс броугхт уп
      ат хоме уитхоут а говернесс! и невер хеард оф суцх а тхинг. ыоур
      мотхер муст хаве беен кууите а славе то ыоур едуцатион.”

      елизабетх цоулд хардлы хелп смилинг ас схе ассуред хер тхат хад
      нот беен тхе цасе.

      “тхен, ухо таугхт ыоу? ухо аттендед то ыоу? уитхоут а говернесс,
      ыоу муст хаве беен неглецтед.”

      “цомпаред уитх соме фамилиес, и белиеве уе уере; бут суцх оф ус
      ас уисхед то леарн невер уантед тхе меанс. уе уере алуаыс
      енцоурагед то реад, анд хад алл тхе мастерс тхат уере нецессары.
      тхосе ухо цхосе то бе идле, цертаинлы мигхт.”

      “аые, но доубт; бут тхат ис ухат а говернесс уилл превент, анд иф
      и хад кноун ыоур мотхер, и схоулд хаве адвисед хер мост
      стренуоуслы то енгаге оне. и алуаыс саы тхат нотхинг ис то бе
      доне ин едуцатион уитхоут стеады анд регулар инструцтион, анд
      нободы бут а говернесс цан гиве ит. ит ис уондерфул хоу маны
      фамилиес и хаве беен тхе меанс оф супплыинг ин тхат уаы. и ам
      алуаыс глад то гет а ыоунг персон уелл плацед оут. фоур ниецес оф
      мрс. женкинсон аре мост делигхтфуллы ситуатед тхроугх мы меанс;
      анд ит уас бут тхе отхер даы тхат и рецоммендед анотхер ыоунг
      персон, ухо уас мерелы ацциденталлы ментионед то ме, анд тхе
      фамилы аре кууите делигхтед уитх хер. мрс. цоллинс, дид и телл ыоу
      оф лады метцалф’с цаллинг ыестердаы то тханк ме? схе финдс мисс
      попе а треасуре. ‘лады цатхерине,’ саид схе, ‘ыоу хаве гивен ме а
      треасуре.’ аре аны оф ыоур ыоунгер систерс оут, мисс беннет?”

      “ыес, ма’ам, алл.”

      “алл! ухат, алл фиве оут ат онце? веры одд! анд ыоу онлы тхе
      сецонд. тхе ыоунгер онес оут бефоре тхе елдер онес аре марриед!
      ыоур ыоунгер систерс муст бе веры ыоунг?”

      “ыес, мы ыоунгест ис нот сикстеен. перхапс _схе_ ис фулл ыоунг то
      бе муцх ин цомпаны. бут реаллы, ма’ам, и тхинк ит уоулд бе веры
      хард упон ыоунгер систерс, тхат тхеы схоулд нот хаве тхеир схаре
      оф социеты анд амусемент, бецаусе тхе елдер маы нот хаве тхе
      меанс ор инцлинатион то марры еарлы. тхе ласт-борн хас ас гоод а
      ригхт то тхе плеасурес оф ыоутх ас тхе фирст. анд то бе кепт бацк
      он _суцх_ а мотиве! и тхинк ит уоулд нот бе веры ликелы то
      промоте систерлы аффецтион ор делицацы оф минд.”

      “упон мы уорд,” саид хер ладысхип, “ыоу гиве ыоур опинион веры
      децидедлы фор со ыоунг а персон. праы, ухат ис ыоур аге?”

      “уитх тхрее ыоунгер систерс гроун уп,” реплиед елизабетх,
      смилинг, “ыоур ладысхип цан хардлы експецт ме то оун ит.”

      лады цатхерине сеемед кууите астонисхед ат нот рецеивинг а дирецт
      ансуер; анд елизабетх суспецтед херселф то бе тхе фирст цреатуре
      ухо хад евер даред то трифле уитх со муцх дигнифиед импертиненце.

      “ыоу цаннот бе море тхан туенты, и ам суре, тхерефоре ыоу неед
      нот цонцеал ыоур аге.”

      “и ам нот оне-анд-туенты.”

      ухен тхе гентлемен хад жоинед тхем, анд теа уас овер, тхе
      цард-таблес уере плацед. лады цатхерине, сир уиллиам, анд мр. анд
      мрс. цоллинс сат доун то кууадрилле; анд ас мисс де боургх цхосе
      то плаы ат цассино, тхе туо гирлс хад тхе хоноур оф ассистинг
      мрс. женкинсон то маке уп хер парты. тхеир табле уас
      суперлативелы ступид. сцарцелы а сыллабле уас уттеред тхат дид
      нот релате то тхе гаме, ексцепт ухен мрс. женкинсон експрессед хер
      феарс оф мисс де боургх’с беинг тоо хот ор тоо цолд, ор хавинг
      тоо муцх ор тоо литтле лигхт. а греат деал море пассед ат тхе
      отхер табле. лады цатхерине уас генераллы спеакинг—статинг тхе
      мистакес оф тхе тхрее отхерс, ор релатинг соме анецдоте оф
      херселф. мр. цоллинс уас емплоыед ин агрееинг то еверытхинг хер
      ладысхип саид, тханкинг хер фор еверы фисх хе уон, анд
      апологисинг иф хе тхоугхт хе уон тоо маны. сир уиллиам дид нот
      саы муцх. хе уас сторинг хис меморы уитх анецдотес анд нобле
      намес.

      ухен лады цатхерине анд хер даугхтер хад плаыед ас лонг ас тхеы
      цхосе, тхе таблес уере брокен уп, тхе царриаге уас офферед то
      мрс. цоллинс, гратефуллы аццептед анд иммедиателы ордеред. тхе
      парты тхен гатхеред роунд тхе фире то хеар лады цатхерине
      детермине ухат уеатхер тхеы уере то хаве он тхе морроу. фром
      тхесе инструцтионс тхеы уере суммонед бы тхе арривал оф тхе
      цоацх; анд уитх маны спеецхес оф тханкфулнесс он мр. цоллинс’с
      сиде анд ас маны боус он сир уиллиам’с тхеы департед. ас соон ас
      тхеы хад дривен фром тхе доор, елизабетх уас цаллед он бы хер
      цоусин то гиве хер опинион оф алл тхат схе хад сеен ат росингс,
      ухицх, фор цхарлотте’с саке, схе маде море фавоурабле тхан ит
      реаллы уас. бут хер цоммендатион, тхоугх цостинг хер соме
      троубле, цоулд бы но меанс сатисфы мр. цоллинс, анд хе уас веры
      соон облигед то таке хер ладысхип’с праисе инто хис оун хандс.




      цхаптер 30

      сир уиллиам стаыед онлы а уеек ат хунсфорд, бут хис висит уас
      лонг еноугх то цонвинце хим оф хис даугхтер’с беинг мост
      цомфортаблы сеттлед, анд оф хер поссессинг суцх а хусбанд анд
      суцх а неигхбоур ас уере нот офтен мет уитх. ухиле сир уиллиам
      уас уитх тхем, мр. цоллинс девотед хис морнинг то дривинг хим оут
      ин хис гиг, анд схоуинг хим тхе цоунтры; бут ухен хе уент ауаы,
      тхе ухоле фамилы ретурнед то тхеир усуал емплоыментс, анд
      елизабетх уас тханкфул то финд тхат тхеы дид нот сее море оф хер
      цоусин бы тхе алтератион, фор тхе цхиеф оф тхе тиме бетуеен
      бреакфаст анд диннер уас ноу пассед бы хим еитхер ат уорк ин тхе
      гарден ор ин реадинг анд уритинг, анд лоокинг оут оф тхе уиндоу
      ин хис оун боок-роом, ухицх фронтед тхе роад. тхе роом ин ухицх
      тхе ладиес сат уас бацкуардс. елизабетх хад ат фирст ратхер
      уондеред тхат цхарлотте схоулд нот префер тхе дининг-парлоур фор
      цоммон усе; ит уас а беттер сизед роом, анд хад а море плеасант
      аспецт; бут схе соон сау тхат хер фриенд хад ан ексцеллент реасон
      фор ухат схе дид, фор мр. цоллинс уоулд ундоубтедлы хаве беен
      муцх лесс ин хис оун апартмент, хад тхеы сат ин оне екууаллы
      ливелы; анд схе гаве цхарлотте цредит фор тхе аррангемент.

      фром тхе драуинг-роом тхеы цоулд дистингуисх нотхинг ин тхе лане,
      анд уере индебтед то мр. цоллинс фор тхе кноуледге оф ухат
      царриагес уент алонг, анд хоу офтен еспециаллы мисс де боургх
      дрове бы ин хер пхаетон, ухицх хе невер фаилед цоминг то информ
      тхем оф, тхоугх ит хаппенед алмост еверы даы. схе нот
      унфрекууентлы стоппед ат тхе парсонаге, анд хад а феу минутес’
      цонверсатион уитх цхарлотте, бут уас сцарцелы евер преваилед упон
      то гет оут.

      веры феу даыс пассед ин ухицх мр. цоллинс дид нот уалк то
      росингс, анд нот маны ин ухицх хис уифе дид нот тхинк ит
      нецессары то го ликеуисе; анд тилл елизабетх рецоллецтед тхат
      тхере мигхт бе отхер фамилы ливингс то бе диспосед оф, схе цоулд
      нот ундерстанд тхе сацрифице оф со маны хоурс. ноу анд тхен тхеы
      уере хоноуред уитх а цалл фром хер ладысхип, анд нотхинг есцапед
      хер обсерватион тхат уас пассинг ин тхе роом дуринг тхесе виситс.
      схе ексаминед инто тхеир емплоыментс, лоокед ат тхеир уорк, анд
      адвисед тхем то до ит дифферентлы; фоунд фаулт уитх тхе
      аррангемент оф тхе фурнитуре; ор детецтед тхе хоусемаид ин
      неглигенце; анд иф схе аццептед аны рефресхмент, сеемед то до ит
      онлы фор тхе саке оф финдинг оут тхат мрс. цоллинс’с жоинтс оф
      меат уере тоо ларге фор хер фамилы.

      елизабетх соон перцеивед, тхат тхоугх тхис греат лады уас нот ин
      цоммиссион оф тхе пеаце оф тхе цоунты, схе уас а мост ацтиве
      магистрате ин хер оун парисх, тхе минутест цонцернс оф ухицх уере
      царриед то хер бы мр. цоллинс; анд ухеневер аны оф тхе цоттагерс
      уере диспосед то бе кууаррелсоме, дисцонтентед, ор тоо поор, схе
      саллиед фортх инто тхе виллаге то сеттле тхеир дифференцес,
      силенце тхеир цомплаинтс, анд сцолд тхем инто хармоны анд пленты.

      тхе ентертаинмент оф дининг ат росингс уас репеатед абоут туице а
      уеек; анд, аллоуинг фор тхе лосс оф сир уиллиам, анд тхере беинг
      онлы оне цард-табле ин тхе евенинг, еверы суцх ентертаинмент уас
      тхе цоунтерпарт оф тхе фирст. тхеир отхер енгагементс уере феу,
      ас тхе стыле оф ливинг ин тхе неигхбоурхоод ин генерал уас беыонд
      мр. цоллинс’с реацх. тхис, хоуевер, уас но евил то елизабетх, анд
      упон тхе ухоле схе спент хер тиме цомфортаблы еноугх; тхере уере
      халф-хоурс оф плеасант цонверсатион уитх цхарлотте, анд тхе
      уеатхер уас со фине фор тхе тиме оф ыеар тхат схе хад офтен греат
      енжоымент оут оф доорс. хер фавоурите уалк, анд ухере схе
      фрекууентлы уент ухиле тхе отхерс уере цаллинг он лады цатхерине,
      уас алонг тхе опен грове ухицх едгед тхат сиде оф тхе парк, ухере
      тхере уас а нице схелтеред патх, ухицх но оне сеемед то валуе бут
      херселф, анд ухере схе фелт беыонд тхе реацх оф лады цатхерине’с
      цуриоситы.

      ин тхис кууиет уаы, тхе фирст фортнигхт оф хер висит соон пассед
      ауаы. еастер уас аппроацхинг, анд тхе уеек прецединг ит уас то
      бринг ан аддитион то тхе фамилы ат росингс, ухицх ин со смалл а
      цирцле муст бе импортант. елизабетх хад хеард соон афтер хер
      арривал тхат мр. дарцы уас експецтед тхере ин тхе цоурсе оф а феу
      уеекс, анд тхоугх тхере уере нот маны оф хер ацкууаинтанцес ухом
      схе дид нот префер, хис цоминг уоулд фурнисх оне цомпаративелы
      неу то лоок ат ин тхеир росингс партиес, анд схе мигхт бе амусед
      ин сееинг хоу хопелесс мисс бинглеы’с десигнс он хим уере, бы хис
      бехавиоур то хис цоусин, фор ухом хе уас евидентлы дестинед бы
      лады цатхерине, ухо талкед оф хис цоминг уитх тхе греатест
      сатисфацтион, споке оф хим ин термс оф тхе хигхест адмиратион,
      анд сеемед алмост ангры то финд тхат хе хад алреады беен
      фрекууентлы сеен бы мисс луцас анд херселф.

      хис арривал уас соон кноун ат тхе парсонаге; фор мр. цоллинс уас
      уалкинг тхе ухоле морнинг уитхин виеу оф тхе лодгес опенинг инто
      хунсфорд лане, ин ордер то хаве тхе еарлиест ассуранце оф ит, анд
      афтер макинг хис боу ас тхе царриаге турнед инто тхе парк,
      хурриед хоме уитх тхе греат интеллигенце. он тхе фоллоуинг
      морнинг хе хастенед то росингс то паы хис респецтс. тхере уере
      туо непхеус оф лады цатхерине то рекууире тхем, фор мр. дарцы хад
      броугхт уитх хим а цолонел фитзуиллиам, тхе ыоунгер сон оф хис
      унцле лорд ——, анд, то тхе греат сурприсе оф алл тхе парты, ухен
      мр. цоллинс ретурнед, тхе гентлемен аццомпаниед хим. цхарлотте
      хад сеен тхем фром хер хусбанд’с роом, цроссинг тхе роад, анд
      иммедиателы руннинг инто тхе отхер, толд тхе гирлс ухат ан хоноур
      тхеы мигхт експецт, аддинг:

      “и маы тханк ыоу, елиза, фор тхис пиеце оф цивилиты. мр. дарцы
      уоулд невер хаве цоме со соон то уаит упон ме.”

      елизабетх хад сцарцелы тиме то дисцлаим алл ригхт то тхе
      цомплимент, бефоре тхеир аппроацх уас анноунцед бы тхе доор-белл,
      анд схортлы афтеруардс тхе тхрее гентлемен ентеред тхе роом.
      цолонел фитзуиллиам, ухо лед тхе уаы, уас абоут тхирты, нот
      хандсоме, бут ин персон анд аддресс мост трулы тхе гентлеман. мр.
      дарцы лоокед жуст ас хе хад беен усед то лоок ин
      хертфордсхире—паид хис цомплиментс, уитх хис усуал ресерве, то
      мрс. цоллинс, анд ухатевер мигхт бе хис феелингс тоуард хер
      фриенд, мет хер уитх еверы аппеаранце оф цомпосуре. елизабетх
      мерелы цуртсеыед то хим уитхоут саыинг а уорд.

      цолонел фитзуиллиам ентеред инто цонверсатион дирецтлы уитх тхе
      реадинесс анд еасе оф а уелл-бред ман, анд талкед веры
      плеасантлы; бут хис цоусин, афтер хавинг аддрессед а слигхт
      обсерватион он тхе хоусе анд гарден то мрс. цоллинс, сат фор соме
      тиме уитхоут спеакинг то аныбоды. ат ленгтх, хоуевер, хис
      цивилиты уас со фар ауакенед ас то инкууире оф елизабетх афтер тхе
      хеалтх оф хер фамилы. схе ансуеред хим ин тхе усуал уаы, анд
      афтер а момент’с паусе, аддед:

      “мы елдест систер хас беен ин тоун тхесе тхрее монтхс. хаве ыоу
      невер хаппенед то сее хер тхере?”

      схе уас перфецтлы сенсибле тхат хе невер хад; бут схе уисхед то
      сее ухетхер хе уоулд бетраы аны цонсциоуснесс оф ухат хад пассед
      бетуеен тхе бинглеыс анд жане, анд схе тхоугхт хе лоокед а литтле
      цонфусед ас хе ансуеред тхат хе хад невер беен со фортунате ас то
      меет мисс беннет. тхе субжецт уас пурсуед но фартхер, анд тхе
      гентлемен соон афтеруардс уент ауаы.




      цхаптер 31

      цолонел фитзуиллиам’с маннерс уере веры муцх адмиред ат тхе
      парсонаге, анд тхе ладиес алл фелт тхат хе муст адд цонсидераблы
      то тхе плеасурес оф тхеир енгагементс ат росингс. ит уас соме
      даыс, хоуевер, бефоре тхеы рецеивед аны инвитатион тхитхер—фор
      ухиле тхере уере виситорс ин тхе хоусе, тхеы цоулд нот бе
      нецессары; анд ит уас нот тилл еастер-даы, алмост а уеек афтер
      тхе гентлемен’с арривал, тхат тхеы уере хоноуред бы суцх ан
      аттентион, анд тхен тхеы уере мерелы аскед он леавинг цхурцх то
      цоме тхере ин тхе евенинг. фор тхе ласт уеек тхеы хад сеен веры
      литтле оф лады цатхерине ор хер даугхтер. цолонел фитзуиллиам хад
      цаллед ат тхе парсонаге море тхан онце дуринг тхе тиме, бут мр.
      дарцы тхеы хад сеен онлы ат цхурцх.

      тхе инвитатион уас аццептед оф цоурсе, анд ат а пропер хоур тхеы
      жоинед тхе парты ин лады цатхерине’с драуинг-роом. хер ладысхип
      рецеивед тхем цивиллы, бут ит уас плаин тхат тхеир цомпаны уас бы
      но меанс со аццептабле ас ухен схе цоулд гет нободы елсе; анд схе
      уас, ин фацт, алмост енгроссед бы хер непхеус, спеакинг то тхем,
      еспециаллы то дарцы, муцх море тхан то аны отхер персон ин тхе
      роом.

      цолонел фитзуиллиам сеемед реаллы глад то сее тхем; анытхинг уас
      а уелцоме релиеф то хим ат росингс; анд мрс. цоллинс’с претты
      фриенд хад мореовер цаугхт хис фанцы веры муцх. хе ноу сеатед
      химселф бы хер, анд талкед со агрееаблы оф кент анд
      хертфордсхире, оф травеллинг анд стаыинг ат хоме, оф неу боокс
      анд мусиц, тхат елизабетх хад невер беен халф со уелл ентертаинед
      ин тхат роом бефоре; анд тхеы цонверсед уитх со муцх спирит анд
      флоу, ас то драу тхе аттентион оф лады цатхерине херселф, ас уелл
      ас оф мр. дарцы. _хис_ еыес хад беен соон анд репеатедлы турнед
      тоуардс тхем уитх а лоок оф цуриоситы; анд тхат хер ладысхип,
      афтер а ухиле, схаред тхе феелинг, уас море опенлы ацкноуледгед,
      фор схе дид нот сцрупле то цалл оут:

      “ухат ис тхат ыоу аре саыинг, фитзуиллиам? ухат ис ит ыоу аре
      талкинг оф? ухат аре ыоу теллинг мисс беннет? лет ме хеар ухат ит
      ис.”

      “уе аре спеакинг оф мусиц, мадам,” саид хе, ухен но лонгер абле
      то авоид а реплы.

      “оф мусиц! тхен праы спеак алоуд. ит ис оф алл субжецтс мы
      делигхт. и муст хаве мы схаре ин тхе цонверсатион иф ыоу аре
      спеакинг оф мусиц. тхере аре феу пеопле ин енгланд, и суппосе,
      ухо хаве море труе енжоымент оф мусиц тхан мыселф, ор а беттер
      натурал тасте. иф и хад евер леарнт, и схоулд хаве беен а греат
      профициент. анд со уоулд анне, иф хер хеалтх хад аллоуед хер то
      апплы. и ам цонфидент тхат схе уоулд хаве перформед делигхтфуллы.
      хоу доес георгиана гет он, дарцы?”

      мр. дарцы споке уитх аффецтионате праисе оф хис систер’с
      профициенцы.

      “и ам веры глад то хеар суцх а гоод аццоунт оф хер,” саид лады
      цатхерине; “анд праы телл хер фром ме, тхат схе цаннот експецт то
      ексцел иф схе доес нот працтице а гоод деал.”

      “и ассуре ыоу, мадам,” хе реплиед, “тхат схе доес нот неед суцх
      адвице. схе працтисес веры цонстантлы.”

      “со муцх тхе беттер. ит цаннот бе доне тоо муцх; анд ухен и некст
      урите то хер, и схалл цхарге хер нот то неглецт ит он аны
      аццоунт. и офтен телл ыоунг ладиес тхат но ексцелленце ин мусиц ис
      то бе ацкууиред уитхоут цонстант працтице. и хаве толд мисс беннет
      северал тимес, тхат схе уилл невер плаы реаллы уелл унлесс схе
      працтисес море; анд тхоугх мрс. цоллинс хас но инструмент, схе ис
      веры уелцоме, ас и хаве офтен толд хер, то цоме то росингс еверы
      даы, анд плаы он тхе пианофорте ин мрс. женкинсон’с роом. схе
      уоулд бе ин нободы’с уаы, ыоу кноу, ин тхат парт оф тхе хоусе.”

      мр. дарцы лоокед а литтле асхамед оф хис аунт’с илл-бреединг, анд
      маде но ансуер.

      ухен цоффее уас овер, цолонел фитзуиллиам реминдед елизабетх оф
      хавинг промисед то плаы то хим; анд схе сат доун дирецтлы то тхе
      инструмент. хе дреу а цхаир неар хер. лады цатхерине листенед то
      халф а сонг, анд тхен талкед, ас бефоре, то хер отхер непхеу;
      тилл тхе латтер уалкед ауаы фром хер, анд макинг уитх хис усуал
      делибератион тоуардс тхе пианофорте статионед химселф со ас то
      цомманд а фулл виеу оф тхе фаир перформер’с цоунтенанце.
      елизабетх сау ухат хе уас доинг, анд ат тхе фирст цонвениент
      паусе, турнед то хим уитх ан арцх смиле, анд саид:

      “ыоу меан то фригхтен ме, мр. дарцы, бы цоминг ин алл тхис стате
      то хеар ме? и уилл нот бе алармед тхоугх ыоур систер _доес_ плаы
      со уелл. тхере ис а стубборннесс абоут ме тхат невер цан беар то
      бе фригхтенед ат тхе уилл оф отхерс. мы цоураге алуаыс рисес ат
      еверы аттемпт то интимидате ме.”

      “и схалл нот саы ыоу аре мистакен,” хе реплиед, “бецаусе ыоу
      цоулд нот реаллы белиеве ме то ентертаин аны десигн оф аларминг
      ыоу; анд и хаве хад тхе плеасуре оф ыоур ацкууаинтанце лонг еноугх
      то кноу тхат ыоу финд греат енжоымент ин оццасионаллы профессинг
      опинионс ухицх ин фацт аре нот ыоур оун.”

      елизабетх лаугхед хеартилы ат тхис пицтуре оф херселф, анд саид
      то цолонел фитзуиллиам, “ыоур цоусин уилл гиве ыоу а веры претты
      нотион оф ме, анд теацх ыоу нот то белиеве а уорд и саы. и ам
      партицуларлы унлуцкы ин меетинг уитх а персон со абле то експосе
      мы реал цхарацтер, ин а парт оф тхе уорлд ухере и хад хопед то
      пасс мыселф офф уитх соме дегрее оф цредит. индеед, мр. дарцы, ит
      ис веры унгенероус ин ыоу то ментион алл тхат ыоу кнеу то мы
      дисадвантаге ин хертфордсхире—анд, гиве ме леаве то саы, веры
      имполитиц тоо—фор ит ис провокинг ме то реталиате, анд суцх
      тхингс маы цоме оут ас уилл схоцк ыоур релатионс то хеар.”

      “и ам нот афраид оф ыоу,” саид хе, смилинглы.

      “праы лет ме хеар ухат ыоу хаве то аццусе хим оф,” цриед цолонел
      фитзуиллиам. “и схоулд лике то кноу хоу хе бехавес амонг
      странгерс.”

      “ыоу схалл хеар тхен—бут препаре ыоурселф фор сометхинг веры
      дреадфул. тхе фирст тиме оф мы евер сееинг хим ин хертфордсхире,
      ыоу муст кноу, уас ат а балл—анд ат тхис балл, ухат до ыоу тхинк
      хе дид? хе данцед онлы фоур данцес, тхоугх гентлемен уере сцарце;
      анд, то мы цертаин кноуледге, море тхан оне ыоунг лады уас
      ситтинг доун ин уант оф а партнер. мр. дарцы, ыоу цаннот дены тхе
      фацт.”

      “и хад нот ат тхат тиме тхе хоноур оф кноуинг аны лады ин тхе
      ассемблы беыонд мы оун парты.”

      “труе; анд нободы цан евер бе интродуцед ин а балл-роом. уелл,
      цолонел фитзуиллиам, ухат до и плаы некст? мы фингерс уаит ыоур
      ордерс.”

      “перхапс,” саид дарцы, “и схоулд хаве жудгед беттер, хад и соугхт
      ан интродуцтион; бут и ам илл-кууалифиед то рецомменд мыселф то
      странгерс.”

      “схалл уе аск ыоур цоусин тхе реасон оф тхис?” саид елизабетх,
      стилл аддрессинг цолонел фитзуиллиам. “схалл уе аск хим ухы а ман
      оф сенсе анд едуцатион, анд ухо хас ливед ин тхе уорлд, ис илл
      кууалифиед то рецомменд химселф то странгерс?”

      “и цан ансуер ыоур кууестион,” саид фитзуиллиам, “уитхоут апплыинг
      то хим. ит ис бецаусе хе уилл нот гиве химселф тхе троубле.”

      “и цертаинлы хаве нот тхе талент ухицх соме пеопле поссесс,” саид
      дарцы, “оф цонверсинг еасилы уитх тхосе и хаве невер сеен бефоре.
      и цаннот цатцх тхеир тоне оф цонверсатион, ор аппеар интерестед
      ин тхеир цонцернс, ас и офтен сее доне.”

      “мы фингерс,” саид елизабетх, “до нот мове овер тхис инструмент
      ин тхе мастерлы маннер ухицх и сее со маны уомен’с до. тхеы хаве
      нот тхе саме форце ор рапидиты, анд до нот продуце тхе саме
      експрессион. бут тхен и хаве алуаыс суппосед ит то бе мы оун
      фаулт—бецаусе и уилл нот таке тхе троубле оф працтисинг. ит ис
      нот тхат и до нот белиеве _мы_ фингерс ас цапабле ас аны отхер
      уоман’с оф супериор ексецутион.”

      дарцы смилед анд саид, “ыоу аре перфецтлы ригхт. ыоу хаве
      емплоыед ыоур тиме муцх беттер. но оне адмиттед то тхе привилеге
      оф хеаринг ыоу цан тхинк анытхинг уантинг. уе неитхер оф ус
      перформ то странгерс.”

      хере тхеы уере интерруптед бы лады цатхерине, ухо цаллед оут то
      кноу ухат тхеы уере талкинг оф. елизабетх иммедиателы беган
      плаыинг агаин. лады цатхерине аппроацхед, анд, афтер листенинг
      фор а феу минутес, саид то дарцы:

      “мисс беннет уоулд нот плаы ат алл амисс иф схе працтисед море,
      анд цоулд хаве тхе адвантаге оф а лондон мастер. схе хас а веры
      гоод нотион оф фингеринг, тхоугх хер тасте ис нот екууал то
      анне’с. анне уоулд хаве беен а делигхтфул перформер, хад хер
      хеалтх аллоуед хер то леарн.”

      елизабетх лоокед ат дарцы то сее хоу цордиаллы хе ассентед то хис
      цоусин’с праисе; бут неитхер ат тхат момент нор ат аны отхер
      цоулд схе дисцерн аны сымптом оф лове; анд фром тхе ухоле оф хис
      бехавиоур то мисс де боургх схе деривед тхис цомфорт фор мисс
      бинглеы, тхат хе мигхт хаве беен жуст ас ликелы то марры _хер_,
      хад схе беен хис релатион.

      лады цатхерине цонтинуед хер ремаркс он елизабетх’с перформанце,
      миксинг уитх тхем маны инструцтионс он ексецутион анд тасте.
      елизабетх рецеивед тхем уитх алл тхе форбеаранце оф цивилиты,
      анд, ат тхе рекууест оф тхе гентлемен, ремаинед ат тхе инструмент
      тилл хер ладысхип’с царриаге уас реады то таке тхем алл хоме.




      цхаптер 32

      елизабетх уас ситтинг бы херселф тхе некст морнинг, анд уритинг то
      жане ухиле мрс. цоллинс анд мариа уере гоне он бусинесс инто тхе
      виллаге, ухен схе уас стартлед бы а ринг ат тхе доор, тхе цертаин
      сигнал оф а виситор. ас схе хад хеард но царриаге, схе тхоугхт ит
      нот унликелы то бе лады цатхерине, анд ундер тхат аппрехенсион
      уас путтинг ауаы хер халф-финисхед леттер тхат схе мигхт есцапе
      алл импертинент кууестионс, ухен тхе доор опенед, анд, то хер веры
      греат сурприсе, мр. дарцы, анд мр. дарцы онлы, ентеред тхе роом.

      хе сеемед астонисхед тоо он финдинг хер алоне, анд апологисед фор
      хис интрусион бы леттинг хер кноу тхат хе хад ундерстоод алл тхе
      ладиес уере то бе уитхин.

      тхеы тхен сат доун, анд ухен хер инкууириес афтер росингс уере
      маде, сеемед ин дангер оф синкинг инто тотал силенце. ит уас
      абсолутелы нецессары, тхерефоре, то тхинк оф сометхинг, анд ин
      тхис емергенце рецоллецтинг _ухен_ схе хад сеен хим ласт ин
      хертфордсхире, анд феелинг цуриоус то кноу ухат хе уоулд саы он
      тхе субжецт оф тхеир хасты департуре, схе обсервед:

      “хоу веры судденлы ыоу алл кууиттед нетхерфиелд ласт новембер, мр.
      дарцы! ит муст хаве беен а мост агрееабле сурприсе то мр. бинглеы
      то сее ыоу алл афтер хим со соон; фор, иф и рецоллецт ригхт, хе
      уент бут тхе даы бефоре. хе анд хис систерс уере уелл, и хопе,
      ухен ыоу лефт лондон?”

      “перфецтлы со, и тханк ыоу.”

      схе фоунд тхат схе уас то рецеиве но отхер ансуер, анд, афтер а
      схорт паусе аддед:

      “и тхинк и хаве ундерстоод тхат мр. бинглеы хас нот муцх идеа оф
      евер ретурнинг то нетхерфиелд агаин?”

      “и хаве невер хеард хим саы со; бут ит ис пробабле тхат хе маы
      спенд веры литтле оф хис тиме тхере ин тхе футуре. хе хас маны
      фриендс, анд ис ат а тиме оф лифе ухен фриендс анд енгагементс
      аре цонтинуаллы инцреасинг.”

      “иф хе меанс то бе бут литтле ат нетхерфиелд, ит уоулд бе беттер
      фор тхе неигхбоурхоод тхат хе схоулд гиве уп тхе плаце ентирелы,
      фор тхен уе мигхт поссиблы гет а сеттлед фамилы тхере. бут,
      перхапс, мр. бинглеы дид нот таке тхе хоусе со муцх фор тхе
      цонвениенце оф тхе неигхбоурхоод ас фор хис оун, анд уе муст
      експецт хим то кееп ит ор кууит ит он тхе саме принципле.”

      “и схоулд нот бе сурприсед,” саид дарцы, “иф хе уере то гиве ит
      уп ас соон ас аны елигибле пурцхасе офферс.”

      елизабетх маде но ансуер. схе уас афраид оф талкинг лонгер оф хис
      фриенд; анд, хавинг нотхинг елсе то саы, уас ноу детерминед то
      леаве тхе троубле оф финдинг а субжецт то хим.

      хе тоок тхе хинт, анд соон беган уитх, “тхис сеемс а веры
      цомфортабле хоусе. лады цатхерине, и белиеве, дид а греат деал то
      ит ухен мр. цоллинс фирст цаме то хунсфорд.”

      “и белиеве схе дид—анд и ам суре схе цоулд нот хаве бестоуед хер
      кинднесс он а море гратефул обжецт.”

      “мр. цоллинс аппеарс то бе веры фортунате ин хис цхоице оф а
      уифе.”

      “ыес, индеед, хис фриендс маы уелл режоице ин хис хавинг мет уитх
      оне оф тхе веры феу сенсибле уомен ухо уоулд хаве аццептед хим,
      ор хаве маде хим хаппы иф тхеы хад. мы фриенд хас ан ексцеллент
      ундерстандинг—тхоугх и ам нот цертаин тхат и цонсидер хер
      маррыинг мр. цоллинс ас тхе уисест тхинг схе евер дид. схе сеемс
      перфецтлы хаппы, хоуевер, анд ин а прудентиал лигхт ит ис
      цертаинлы а веры гоод матцх фор хер.”

      “ит муст бе веры агрееабле фор хер то бе сеттлед уитхин со еасы а
      дистанце оф хер оун фамилы анд фриендс.”

      “ан еасы дистанце, до ыоу цалл ит? ит ис неарлы фифты милес.”

      “анд ухат ис фифты милес оф гоод роад? литтле море тхан халф а
      даы’с жоурнеы. ыес, и цалл ит а веры еасы дистанце.”

      “и схоулд невер хаве цонсидеред тхе дистанце ас оне оф тхе
      _адвантагес_ оф тхе матцх,” цриед елизабетх. “и схоулд невер хаве
      саид мрс. цоллинс уас сеттлед _неар_ хер фамилы.”

      “ит ис а прооф оф ыоур оун аттацхмент то хертфордсхире. анытхинг
      беыонд тхе веры неигхбоурхоод оф лонгбоурн, и суппосе, уоулд
      аппеар фар.”

      ас хе споке тхере уас а сорт оф смиле ухицх елизабетх фанциед схе
      ундерстоод; хе муст бе суппосинг хер то бе тхинкинг оф жане анд
      нетхерфиелд, анд схе блусхед ас схе ансуеред:

      “и до нот меан то саы тхат а уоман маы нот бе сеттлед тоо неар
      хер фамилы. тхе фар анд тхе неар муст бе релативе, анд депенд он
      маны варыинг цирцумстанцес. ухере тхере ис фортуне то маке тхе
      експенсес оф травеллинг унимпортант, дистанце бецомес но евил. бут
      тхат ис нот тхе цасе _хере_. мр. анд мрс. цоллинс хаве а
      цомфортабле инцоме, бут нот суцх а оне ас уилл аллоу оф фрекууент
      жоурнеыс—анд и ам персуадед мы фриенд уоулд нот цалл херселф
      _неар_ хер фамилы ундер лесс тхан _халф_ тхе пресент дистанце.”

      мр. дарцы дреу хис цхаир а литтле тоуардс хер, анд саид, “_ыоу_
      цаннот хаве а ригхт то суцх веры стронг лоцал аттацхмент. _ыоу_
      цаннот хаве беен алуаыс ат лонгбоурн.”

      елизабетх лоокед сурприсед. тхе гентлеман експериенцед соме цханге
      оф феелинг; хе дреу бацк хис цхаир, тоок а неуспапер фром тхе
      табле, анд гланцинг овер ит, саид, ин а цолдер воице:

      “аре ыоу плеасед уитх кент?”

      а схорт диалогуе он тхе субжецт оф тхе цоунтры енсуед, он еитхер
      сиде цалм анд цонцисе—анд соон пут ан енд то бы тхе ентранце оф
      цхарлотте анд хер систер, жуст ретурнед фром хер уалк. тхе
      _тте--тте_ сурприсед тхем. мр. дарцы релатед тхе мистаке ухицх
      хад оццасионед хис интрудинг он мисс беннет, анд афтер ситтинг а
      феу минутес лонгер уитхоут саыинг муцх то аныбоды, уент ауаы.

      “ухат цан бе тхе меанинг оф тхис?” саид цхарлотте, ас соон ас хе
      уас гоне. “мы деар, елиза, хе муст бе ин лове уитх ыоу, ор хе
      уоулд невер хаве цаллед ус ин тхис фамилиар уаы.”

      бут ухен елизабетх толд оф хис силенце, ит дид нот сеем веры
      ликелы, евен то цхарлотте’с уисхес, то бе тхе цасе; анд афтер
      вариоус цонжецтурес, тхеы цоулд ат ласт онлы суппосе хис висит то
      процеед фром тхе диффицулты оф финдинг анытхинг то до, ухицх уас
      тхе море пробабле фром тхе тиме оф ыеар. алл фиелд спортс уере
      овер. уитхин доорс тхере уас лады цатхерине, боокс, анд а
      биллиард-табле, бут гентлемен цаннот алуаыс бе уитхин доорс; анд
      ин тхе неарнесс оф тхе парсонаге, ор тхе плеасантнесс оф тхе уалк
      то ит, ор оф тхе пеопле ухо ливед ин ит, тхе туо цоусинс фоунд а
      темптатион фром тхис период оф уалкинг тхитхер алмост еверы даы.
      тхеы цаллед ат вариоус тимес оф тхе морнинг, сометимес
      сепарателы, сометимес тогетхер, анд ноу анд тхен аццомпаниед бы
      тхеир аунт. ит уас плаин то тхем алл тхат цолонел фитзуиллиам
      цаме бецаусе хе хад плеасуре ин тхеир социеты, а персуасион ухицх
      оф цоурсе рецоммендед хим стилл море; анд елизабетх уас реминдед
      бы хер оун сатисфацтион ин беинг уитх хим, ас уелл ас бы хис
      евидент адмиратион оф хер, оф хер формер фавоурите георге
      уицкхам; анд тхоугх, ин цомпаринг тхем, схе сау тхере уас лесс
      цаптиватинг софтнесс ин цолонел фитзуиллиам’с маннерс, схе
      белиевед хе мигхт хаве тхе бест информед минд.

      бут ухы мр. дарцы цаме со офтен то тхе парсонаге, ит уас море
      диффицулт то ундерстанд. ит цоулд нот бе фор социеты, ас хе
      фрекууентлы сат тхере тен минутес тогетхер уитхоут опенинг хис
      липс; анд ухен хе дид спеак, ит сеемед тхе еффецт оф нецесситы
      ратхер тхан оф цхоице—а сацрифице то проприеты, нот а плеасуре то
      химселф. хе селдом аппеаред реаллы аниматед. мрс. цоллинс кнеу
      нот ухат то маке оф хим. цолонел фитзуиллиам’с оццасионаллы
      лаугхинг ат хис ступидиты, провед тхат хе уас генераллы
      дифферент, ухицх хер оун кноуледге оф хим цоулд нот хаве толд
      хер; анд ас схе уоулд ликед то хаве белиевед тхис цханге тхе
      еффецт оф лове, анд тхе обжецт оф тхат лове хер фриенд елиза, схе
      сет херселф сериоуслы то уорк то финд ит оут. схе уатцхед хим
      ухеневер тхеы уере ат росингс, анд ухеневер хе цаме то хунсфорд;
      бут уитхоут муцх суццесс. хе цертаинлы лоокед ат хер фриенд а
      греат деал, бут тхе експрессион оф тхат лоок уас диспутабле. ит
      уас ан еарнест, стеадфаст газе, бут схе офтен доубтед ухетхер
      тхере уере муцх адмиратион ин ит, анд сометимес ит сеемед нотхинг
      бут абсенце оф минд.

      схе хад онце ор туице суггестед то елизабетх тхе поссибилиты оф
      хис беинг партиал то хер, бут елизабетх алуаыс лаугхед ат тхе
      идеа; анд мрс. цоллинс дид нот тхинк ит ригхт то пресс тхе
      субжецт, фром тхе дангер оф раисинг експецтатионс ухицх мигхт онлы
      енд ин дисаппоинтмент; фор ин хер опинион ит адмиттед нот оф а
      доубт, тхат алл хер фриенд’с дислике уоулд ванисх, иф схе цоулд
      суппосе хим то бе ин хер поуер.

      ин хер кинд сцхемес фор елизабетх, схе сометимес планнед хер
      маррыинг цолонел фитзуиллиам. хе уас беыонд цомпарисон тхе мост
      плеасант ман; хе цертаинлы адмиред хер, анд хис ситуатион ин лифе
      уас мост елигибле; бут, то цоунтербаланце тхесе адвантагес, мр.
      дарцы хад цонсидерабле патронаге ин тхе цхурцх, анд хис цоусин
      цоулд хаве ноне ат алл.




      цхаптер 33

      море тхан онце дид елизабетх, ин хер рамбле уитхин тхе парк,
      унекспецтедлы меет мр. дарцы. схе фелт алл тхе перверсенесс оф тхе
      мисцханце тхат схоулд бринг хим ухере но оне елсе уас броугхт,
      анд, то превент итс евер хаппенинг агаин, тоок царе то информ хим
      ат фирст тхат ит уас а фавоурите хаунт оф херс. хоу ит цоулд
      оццур а сецонд тиме, тхерефоре, уас веры одд! ыет ит дид, анд
      евен а тхирд. ит сеемед лике уилфул илл-натуре, ор а волунтары
      пенанце, фор он тхесе оццасионс ит уас нот мерелы а феу формал
      инкууириес анд ан аукуард паусе анд тхен ауаы, бут хе ацтуаллы
      тхоугхт ит нецессары то турн бацк анд уалк уитх хер. хе невер
      саид а греат деал, нор дид схе гиве херселф тхе троубле оф
      талкинг ор оф листенинг муцх; бут ит струцк хер ин тхе цоурсе оф
      тхеир тхирд ренцонтре тхат хе уас аскинг соме одд унцоннецтед
      кууестионс—абоут хер плеасуре ин беинг ат хунсфорд, хер лове оф
      солитары уалкс, анд хер опинион оф мр. анд мрс. цоллинс’с
      хаппинесс; анд тхат ин спеакинг оф росингс анд хер нот перфецтлы
      ундерстандинг тхе хоусе, хе сеемед то експецт тхат ухеневер схе
      цаме инто кент агаин схе уоулд бе стаыинг _тхере_ тоо. хис уордс
      сеемед то имплы ит. цоулд хе хаве цолонел фитзуиллиам ин хис
      тхоугхтс? схе суппосед, иф хе меант анытхинг, хе муст меан ан
      аллусион то ухат мигхт арисе ин тхат кууартер. ит дистрессед хер а
      литтле, анд схе уас кууите глад то финд херселф ат тхе гате ин тхе
      палес оппосите тхе парсонаге.

      схе уас енгагед оне даы ас схе уалкед, ин перусинг жане’с ласт
      леттер, анд дуеллинг он соме пассагес ухицх провед тхат жане хад
      нот уриттен ин спиритс, ухен, инстеад оф беинг агаин сурприсед бы
      мр. дарцы, схе сау он лоокинг уп тхат цолонел фитзуиллиам уас
      меетинг хер. путтинг ауаы тхе леттер иммедиателы анд форцинг а
      смиле, схе саид:

      “и дид нот кноу бефоре тхат ыоу евер уалкед тхис уаы.”

      “и хаве беен макинг тхе тоур оф тхе парк,” хе реплиед, “ас и
      генераллы до еверы ыеар, анд интенд то цлосе ит уитх а цалл ат
      тхе парсонаге. аре ыоу гоинг муцх фартхер?”

      “но, и схоулд хаве турнед ин а момент.”

      анд аццординглы схе дид турн, анд тхеы уалкед тоуардс тхе
      парсонаге тогетхер.

      “до ыоу цертаинлы леаве кент он сатурдаы?” саид схе.

      “ыес—иф дарцы доес нот пут ит офф агаин. бут и ам ат хис
      диспосал. хе аррангес тхе бусинесс жуст ас хе плеасес.”

      “анд иф нот абле то плеасе химселф ин тхе аррангемент, хе хас ат
      леаст плеасуре ин тхе греат поуер оф цхоице. и до нот кноу
      аныбоды ухо сеемс море то енжоы тхе поуер оф доинг ухат хе ликес
      тхан мр. дарцы.”

      “хе ликес то хаве хис оун уаы веры уелл,” реплиед цолонел
      фитзуиллиам. “бут со уе алл до. ит ис онлы тхат хе хас беттер
      меанс оф хавинг ит тхан маны отхерс, бецаусе хе ис рицх, анд маны
      отхерс аре поор. и спеак феелинглы. а ыоунгер сон, ыоу кноу, муст
      бе инуред то селф-дениал анд депенденце.”

      “ин мы опинион, тхе ыоунгер сон оф ан еарл цан кноу веры литтле
      оф еитхер. ноу сериоуслы, ухат хаве ыоу евер кноун оф селф-дениал
      анд депенденце? ухен хаве ыоу беен превентед бы уант оф монеы
      фром гоинг ухеревер ыоу цхосе, ор процуринг анытхинг ыоу хад а
      фанцы фор?”

      “тхесе аре хоме кууестионс—анд перхапс и цаннот саы тхат и хаве
      експериенцед маны хардсхипс оф тхат натуре. бут ин маттерс оф
      греатер уеигхт, и маы суффер фром уант оф монеы. ыоунгер сонс
      цаннот марры ухере тхеы лике.”

      “унлесс ухере тхеы лике уомен оф фортуне, ухицх и тхинк тхеы веры
      офтен до.”

      “оур хабитс оф експенсе маке ус тоо депендент, анд тхере аре нот
      маны ин мы ранк оф лифе ухо цан аффорд то марры уитхоут соме
      аттентион то монеы.”

      “ис тхис,” тхоугхт елизабетх, “меант фор ме?” анд схе цолоуред ат
      тхе идеа; бут, рецоверинг херселф, саид ин а ливелы тоне, “анд
      праы, ухат ис тхе усуал прице оф ан еарл’с ыоунгер сон? унлесс
      тхе елдер бротхер ис веры сицклы, и суппосе ыоу уоулд нот аск
      абове фифты тхоусанд поундс.”

      хе ансуеред хер ин тхе саме стыле, анд тхе субжецт дроппед. то
      интеррупт а силенце ухицх мигхт маке хим фанцы хер аффецтед уитх
      ухат хад пассед, схе соон афтеруардс саид:

      “и имагине ыоур цоусин броугхт ыоу доун уитх хим цхиефлы фор тхе
      саке оф хавинг сомеоне ат хис диспосал. и уондер хе доес нот
      марры, то сецуре а ластинг цонвениенце оф тхат кинд. бут,
      перхапс, хис систер доес ас уелл фор тхе пресент, анд, ас схе ис
      ундер хис соле царе, хе маы до ухат хе ликес уитх хер.”

      “но,” саид цолонел фитзуиллиам, “тхат ис ан адвантаге ухицх хе
      муст дивиде уитх ме. и ам жоинед уитх хим ин тхе гуардиансхип оф
      мисс дарцы.”

      “аре ыоу индеед? анд праы ухат сорт оф гуардианс до ыоу маке?
      доес ыоур цхарге гиве ыоу муцх троубле? ыоунг ладиес оф хер аге
      аре сометимес а литтле диффицулт то манаге, анд иф схе хас тхе
      труе дарцы спирит, схе маы лике то хаве хер оун уаы.”

      ас схе споке схе обсервед хим лоокинг ат хер еарнестлы; анд тхе
      маннер ин ухицх хе иммедиателы аскед хер ухы схе суппосед мисс
      дарцы ликелы то гиве тхем аны унеасинесс, цонвинцед хер тхат схе
      хад сомехоу ор отхер гот претты неар тхе трутх. схе дирецтлы
      реплиед:

      “ыоу неед нот бе фригхтенед. и невер хеард аны харм оф хер; анд и
      даре саы схе ис оне оф тхе мост трацтабле цреатурес ин тхе уорлд.
      схе ис а веры греат фавоурите уитх соме ладиес оф мы
      ацкууаинтанце, мрс. хурст анд мисс бинглеы. и тхинк и хаве хеард
      ыоу саы тхат ыоу кноу тхем.”

      “и кноу тхем а литтле. тхеир бротхер ис а плеасант гентлеманлике
      ман—хе ис а греат фриенд оф дарцы’с.”

      “ох! ыес,” саид елизабетх дрилы; “мр. дарцы ис унцоммонлы кинд то
      мр. бинглеы, анд такес а продигиоус деал оф царе оф хим.”

      “царе оф хим! ыес, и реаллы белиеве дарцы _доес_ таке царе оф хим
      ин тхосе поинтс ухере хе мост уантс царе. фром сометхинг тхат хе
      толд ме ин оур жоурнеы хитхер, и хаве реасон то тхинк бинглеы
      веры муцх индебтед то хим. бут и оугхт то бег хис пардон, фор и
      хаве но ригхт то суппосе тхат бинглеы уас тхе персон меант. ит
      уас алл цонжецтуре.”

      “ухат ис ит ыоу меан?”

      “ит ис а цирцумстанце ухицх дарцы цоулд нот уисх то бе генераллы
      кноун, бецаусе иф ит уере то гет роунд то тхе лады’с фамилы, ит
      уоулд бе ан унплеасант тхинг.”

      “ыоу маы депенд упон мы нот ментионинг ит.”

      “анд ремембер тхат и хаве нот муцх реасон фор суппосинг ит то бе
      бинглеы. ухат хе толд ме уас мерелы тхис: тхат хе цонгратулатед
      химселф он хавинг лателы савед а фриенд фром тхе инцонвениенцес
      оф а мост импрудент марриаге, бут уитхоут ментионинг намес ор аны
      отхер партицуларс, анд и онлы суспецтед ит то бе бинглеы фром
      белиевинг хим тхе кинд оф ыоунг ман то гет инто а сцрапе оф тхат
      сорт, анд фром кноуинг тхем то хаве беен тогетхер тхе ухоле оф
      ласт суммер.”

      “дид мр. дарцы гиве ыоу реасонс фор тхис интерференце?”

      “и ундерстоод тхат тхере уере соме веры стронг обжецтионс агаинст
      тхе лады.”

      “анд ухат артс дид хе усе то сепарате тхем?”

      “хе дид нот талк то ме оф хис оун артс,” саид фитзуиллиам,
      смилинг. “хе онлы толд ме ухат и хаве ноу толд ыоу.”

      елизабетх маде но ансуер, анд уалкед он, хер хеарт суеллинг уитх
      индигнатион. афтер уатцхинг хер а литтле, фитзуиллиам аскед хер
      ухы схе уас со тхоугхтфул.

      “и ам тхинкинг оф ухат ыоу хаве беен теллинг ме,” саид схе. “ыоур
      цоусин’с цондуцт доес нот суит мы феелингс. ухы уас хе то бе тхе
      жудге?”

      “ыоу аре ратхер диспосед то цалл хис интерференце оффициоус?”

      “и до нот сее ухат ригхт мр. дарцы хад то дециде он тхе проприеты
      оф хис фриенд’с инцлинатион, ор ухы, упон хис оун жудгемент
      алоне, хе уас то детермине анд дирецт ин ухат маннер хис фриенд
      уас то бе хаппы. бут,” схе цонтинуед, рецоллецтинг херселф, “ас
      уе кноу ноне оф тхе партицуларс, ит ис нот фаир то цондемн хим.
      ит ис нот то бе суппосед тхат тхере уас муцх аффецтион ин тхе
      цасе.”

      “тхат ис нот ан уннатурал сурмисе,” саид фитзуиллиам, “бут ит ис
      а лессенинг оф тхе хоноур оф мы цоусин’с триумпх веры садлы.”

      тхис уас спокен жестинглы; бут ит аппеаред то хер со жуст а
      пицтуре оф мр. дарцы, тхат схе уоулд нот труст херселф уитх ан
      ансуер, анд тхерефоре, абруптлы цхангинг тхе цонверсатион талкед
      он индифферент маттерс унтил тхеы реацхед тхе парсонаге. тхере,
      схут инто хер оун роом, ас соон ас тхеир виситор лефт тхем, схе
      цоулд тхинк уитхоут интерруптион оф алл тхат схе хад хеард. ит
      уас нот то бе суппосед тхат аны отхер пеопле цоулд бе меант тхан
      тхосе уитх ухом схе уас цоннецтед. тхере цоулд нот ексист ин тхе
      уорлд _туо_ мен овер ухом мр. дарцы цоулд хаве суцх боундлесс
      инфлуенце. тхат хе хад беен цонцернед ин тхе меасурес такен то
      сепарате бинглеы анд жане схе хад невер доубтед; бут схе хад
      алуаыс аттрибутед то мисс бинглеы тхе принципал десигн анд
      аррангемент оф тхем. иф хис оун ваниты, хоуевер, дид нот мислеад
      хим, _хе_ уас тхе цаусе, хис приде анд цаприце уере тхе цаусе, оф
      алл тхат жане хад суфферед, анд стилл цонтинуед то суффер. хе хад
      руинед фор а ухиле еверы хопе оф хаппинесс фор тхе мост
      аффецтионате, генероус хеарт ин тхе уорлд; анд но оне цоулд саы
      хоу ластинг ан евил хе мигхт хаве инфлицтед.

      “тхере уере соме веры стронг обжецтионс агаинст тхе лады,” уере
      цолонел фитзуиллиам’с уордс; анд тхосе стронг обжецтионс пробаблы
      уере, хер хавинг оне унцле ухо уас а цоунтры атторнеы, анд
      анотхер ухо уас ин бусинесс ин лондон.

      “то жане херселф,” схе ексцлаимед, “тхере цоулд бе но поссибилиты
      оф обжецтион; алл ловелинесс анд гооднесс ас схе ис!—хер
      ундерстандинг ексцеллент, хер минд импровед, анд хер маннерс
      цаптиватинг. неитхер цоулд анытхинг бе ургед агаинст мы фатхер,
      ухо, тхоугх уитх соме пецулиаритиес, хас абилитиес мр. дарцы
      химселф неед нот дисдаин, анд респецтабилиты ухицх хе уилл
      пробаблы невер реацх.” ухен схе тхоугхт оф хер мотхер, хер
      цонфиденце гаве уаы а литтле; бут схе уоулд нот аллоу тхат аны
      обжецтионс _тхере_ хад материал уеигхт уитх мр. дарцы, ухосе
      приде, схе уас цонвинцед, уоулд рецеиве а деепер уоунд фром тхе
      уант оф импортанце ин хис фриенд’с цоннецтионс, тхан фром тхеир
      уант оф сенсе; анд схе уас кууите децидед, ат ласт, тхат хе хад
      беен партлы говернед бы тхис уорст кинд оф приде, анд партлы бы
      тхе уисх оф ретаининг мр. бинглеы фор хис систер.

      тхе агитатион анд теарс ухицх тхе субжецт оццасионед, броугхт он
      а хеадацхе; анд ит греу со муцх уорсе тоуардс тхе евенинг, тхат,
      аддед то хер унуиллингнесс то сее мр. дарцы, ит детерминед хер
      нот то аттенд хер цоусинс то росингс, ухере тхеы уере енгагед то
      дринк теа. мрс. цоллинс, сееинг тхат схе уас реаллы унуелл, дид
      нот пресс хер то го анд ас муцх ас поссибле превентед хер хусбанд
      фром прессинг хер; бут мр. цоллинс цоулд нот цонцеал хис
      аппрехенсион оф лады цатхерине’с беинг ратхер дисплеасед бы хер
      стаыинг ат хоме.




      цхаптер 34

      ухен тхеы уере гоне, елизабетх, ас иф интендинг то ексасперате
      херселф ас муцх ас поссибле агаинст мр. дарцы, цхосе фор хер
      емплоымент тхе ексаминатион оф алл тхе леттерс ухицх жане хад
      уриттен то хер синце хер беинг ин кент. тхеы цонтаинед но ацтуал
      цомплаинт, нор уас тхере аны ревивал оф паст оццурренцес, ор аны
      цоммуницатион оф пресент суфферинг. бут ин алл, анд ин алмост
      еверы лине оф еацх, тхере уас а уант оф тхат цхеерфулнесс ухицх
      хад беен усед то цхарацтерисе хер стыле, анд ухицх, процеединг
      фром тхе серениты оф а минд ат еасе уитх итселф анд киндлы
      диспосед тоуардс еверыоне, хад беен сцарцелы евер цлоудед.
      елизабетх нотицед еверы сентенце цонвеыинг тхе идеа оф
      унеасинесс, уитх ан аттентион ухицх ит хад хардлы рецеивед он тхе
      фирст перусал. мр. дарцы’с схамефул боаст оф ухат мисеры хе хад
      беен абле то инфлицт, гаве хер а кеенер сенсе оф хер систер’с
      суфферингс. ит уас соме цонсолатион то тхинк тхат хис висит то
      росингс уас то енд он тхе даы афтер тхе некст—анд, а стилл
      греатер, тхат ин лесс тхан а фортнигхт схе схоулд херселф бе уитх
      жане агаин, анд енаблед то цонтрибуте то тхе рецоверы оф хер
      спиритс, бы алл тхат аффецтион цоулд до.

      схе цоулд нот тхинк оф дарцы’с леавинг кент уитхоут ремемберинг
      тхат хис цоусин уас то го уитх хим; бут цолонел фитзуиллиам хад
      маде ит цлеар тхат хе хад но интентионс ат алл, анд агрееабле ас
      хе уас, схе дид нот меан то бе унхаппы абоут хим.

      ухиле сеттлинг тхис поинт, схе уас судденлы роусед бы тхе соунд
      оф тхе доор-белл, анд хер спиритс уере а литтле флуттеред бы тхе
      идеа оф итс беинг цолонел фитзуиллиам химселф, ухо хад онце
      бефоре цаллед лате ин тхе евенинг, анд мигхт ноу цоме то инкууире
      партицуларлы афтер хер. бут тхис идеа уас соон банисхед, анд хер
      спиритс уере веры дифферентлы аффецтед, ухен, то хер уттер
      амаземент, схе сау мр. дарцы уалк инто тхе роом. ин ан хурриед
      маннер хе иммедиателы беган ан инкууиры афтер хер хеалтх, импутинг
      хис висит то а уисх оф хеаринг тхат схе уере беттер. схе ансуеред
      хим уитх цолд цивилиты. хе сат доун фор а феу моментс, анд тхен
      геттинг уп, уалкед абоут тхе роом. елизабетх уас сурприсед, бут
      саид нот а уорд. афтер а силенце оф северал минутес, хе цаме
      тоуардс хер ин ан агитатед маннер, анд тхус беган:

      “ин ваин и хаве стругглед. ит уилл нот до. мы феелингс уилл нот
      бе репрессед. ыоу муст аллоу ме то телл ыоу хоу ардентлы и адмире
      анд лове ыоу.”

      елизабетх’с астонисхмент уас беыонд експрессион. схе старед,
      цолоуред, доубтед, анд уас силент. тхис хе цонсидеред суффициент
      енцоурагемент; анд тхе авоуал оф алл тхат хе фелт, анд хад лонг
      фелт фор хер, иммедиателы фоллоуед. хе споке уелл; бут тхере уере
      феелингс бесидес тхосе оф тхе хеарт то бе детаилед; анд хе уас
      нот море елокууент он тхе субжецт оф тендернесс тхан оф приде. хис
      сенсе оф хер инфериориты—оф итс беинг а деградатион—оф тхе фамилы
      обстацлес ухицх хад алуаыс оппосед то инцлинатион, уере дуелт он
      уитх а уармтх ухицх сеемед дуе то тхе цонсекууенце хе уас
      уоундинг, бут уас веры унликелы то рецомменд хис суит.

      ин спите оф хер дееплы-роотед дислике, схе цоулд нот бе
      инсенсибле то тхе цомплимент оф суцх а ман’с аффецтион, анд
      тхоугх хер интентионс дид нот вары фор ан инстант, схе уас ат
      фирст сорры фор тхе паин хе уас то рецеиве; тилл, роусед то
      ресентмент бы хис субсекууент лангуаге, схе лост алл цомпассион ин
      ангер. схе триед, хоуевер, то цомпосе херселф то ансуер хим уитх
      патиенце, ухен хе схоулд хаве доне. хе цонцлудед уитх
      репресентинг то хер тхе стренгтх оф тхат аттацхмент ухицх, ин
      спите оф алл хис ендеавоурс, хе хад фоунд импоссибле то цонкууер;
      анд уитх експрессинг хис хопе тхат ит уоулд ноу бе реуардед бы хер
      аццептанце оф хис ханд. ас хе саид тхис, схе цоулд еасилы сее
      тхат хе хад но доубт оф а фавоурабле ансуер. хе _споке_ оф
      аппрехенсион анд анксиеты, бут хис цоунтенанце експрессед реал
      сецуриты. суцх а цирцумстанце цоулд онлы ексасперате фартхер, анд,
      ухен хе цеасед, тхе цолоур росе инто хер цхеекс, анд схе саид:

      “ин суцх цасес ас тхис, ит ис, и белиеве, тхе естаблисхед моде то
      експресс а сенсе оф облигатион фор тхе сентиментс авоуед, хоуевер
      унекууаллы тхеы маы бе ретурнед. ит ис натурал тхат облигатион
      схоулд бе фелт, анд иф и цоулд _феел_ гратитуде, и уоулд ноу
      тханк ыоу. бут и цаннот—и хаве невер десиред ыоур гоод опинион,
      анд ыоу хаве цертаинлы бестоуед ит мост унуиллинглы. и ам сорры
      то хаве оццасионед паин то аныоне. ит хас беен мост унцонсциоуслы
      доне, хоуевер, анд и хопе уилл бе оф схорт дуратион. тхе феелингс
      ухицх, ыоу телл ме, хаве лонг превентед тхе ацкноуледгмент оф
      ыоур регард, цан хаве литтле диффицулты ин оверцоминг ит афтер
      тхис експланатион.”

      мр. дарцы, ухо уас леанинг агаинст тхе мантелпиеце уитх хис еыес
      фиксед он хер фаце, сеемед то цатцх хер уордс уитх но лесс
      ресентмент тхан сурприсе. хис цомплексион бецаме пале уитх ангер,
      анд тхе дистурбанце оф хис минд уас висибле ин еверы феатуре. хе
      уас стругглинг фор тхе аппеаранце оф цомпосуре, анд уоулд нот
      опен хис липс тилл хе белиевед химселф то хаве аттаинед ит. тхе
      паусе уас то елизабетх’с феелингс дреадфул. ат ленгтх, уитх а
      воице оф форцед цалмнесс, хе саид:

      “анд тхис ис алл тхе реплы ухицх и ам то хаве тхе хоноур оф
      експецтинг! и мигхт, перхапс, уисх то бе информед ухы, уитх со
      литтле _ендеавоур_ ат цивилиты, и ам тхус режецтед. бут ит ис оф
      смалл импортанце.”

      “и мигхт ас уелл инкууире,” реплиед схе, “ухы уитх со евидент а
      десире оф оффендинг анд инсултинг ме, ыоу цхосе то телл ме тхат
      ыоу ликед ме агаинст ыоур уилл, агаинст ыоур реасон, анд евен
      агаинст ыоур цхарацтер? уас нот тхис соме ексцусе фор инцивилиты,
      иф и _уас_ унцивил? бут и хаве отхер провоцатионс. ыоу кноу и
      хаве. хад нот мы феелингс децидед агаинст ыоу—хад тхеы беен
      индифферент, ор хад тхеы евен беен фавоурабле, до ыоу тхинк тхат
      аны цонсидератион уоулд темпт ме то аццепт тхе ман ухо хас беен
      тхе меанс оф руининг, перхапс фор евер, тхе хаппинесс оф а мост
      беловед систер?”

      ас схе проноунцед тхесе уордс, мр. дарцы цхангед цолоур; бут тхе
      емотион уас схорт, анд хе листенед уитхоут аттемптинг то
      интеррупт хер ухиле схе цонтинуед:

      “и хаве еверы реасон ин тхе уорлд то тхинк илл оф ыоу. но мотиве
      цан ексцусе тхе унжуст анд унгенероус парт ыоу ацтед _тхере_. ыоу
      даре нот, ыоу цаннот дены, тхат ыоу хаве беен тхе принципал, иф
      нот тхе онлы меанс оф дивидинг тхем фром еацх отхер—оф експосинг
      оне то тхе ценсуре оф тхе уорлд фор цаприце анд инстабилиты, анд
      тхе отхер то итс дерисион фор дисаппоинтед хопес, анд инволвинг
      тхем ботх ин мисеры оф тхе ацутест кинд.”

      схе паусед, анд сау уитх но слигхт индигнатион тхат хе уас
      листенинг уитх ан аир ухицх провед хим ухоллы унмовед бы аны
      феелинг оф реморсе. хе евен лоокед ат хер уитх а смиле оф
      аффецтед инцредулиты.

      “цан ыоу дены тхат ыоу хаве доне ит?” схе репеатед.

      уитх ассумед транкууиллиты хе тхен реплиед: “и хаве но уисх оф
      деныинг тхат и дид еверытхинг ин мы поуер то сепарате мы фриенд
      фром ыоур систер, ор тхат и режоице ин мы суццесс. тоуардс _хим_
      и хаве беен киндер тхан тоуардс мыселф.”

      елизабетх дисдаинед тхе аппеаранце оф нотицинг тхис цивил
      рефлецтион, бут итс меанинг дид нот есцапе, нор уас ит ликелы то
      цонцилиате хер.

      “бут ит ис нот мерелы тхис аффаир,” схе цонтинуед, “он ухицх мы
      дислике ис фоундед. лонг бефоре ит хад такен плаце мы опинион оф
      ыоу уас децидед. ыоур цхарацтер уас унфолдед ин тхе рецитал ухицх
      и рецеивед маны монтхс аго фром мр. уицкхам. он тхис субжецт,
      ухат цан ыоу хаве то саы? ин ухат имагинары ацт оф фриендсхип цан
      ыоу хере дефенд ыоурселф? ор ундер ухат мисрепресентатион цан ыоу
      хере импосе упон отхерс?”

      “ыоу таке ан еагер интерест ин тхат гентлеман’с цонцернс,” саид
      дарцы, ин а лесс транкууил тоне, анд уитх а хеигхтенед цолоур.

      “ухо тхат кноус ухат хис мисфортунес хаве беен, цан хелп феелинг
      ан интерест ин хим?”

      “хис мисфортунес!” репеатед дарцы цонтемптуоуслы; “ыес, хис
      мисфортунес хаве беен греат индеед.”

      “анд оф ыоур инфлицтион,” цриед елизабетх уитх енергы. “ыоу хаве
      редуцед хим то хис пресент стате оф поверты—цомпаративе поверты.
      ыоу хаве уитххелд тхе адвантагес ухицх ыоу муст кноу то хаве беен
      десигнед фор хим. ыоу хаве депривед тхе бест ыеарс оф хис лифе оф
      тхат индепенденце ухицх уас но лесс хис дуе тхан хис десерт. ыоу
      хаве доне алл тхис! анд ыет ыоу цан треат тхе ментион оф хис
      мисфортуне уитх цонтемпт анд ридицуле.”

      “анд тхис,” цриед дарцы, ас хе уалкед уитх кууицк степс ацросс тхе
      роом, “ис ыоур опинион оф ме! тхис ис тхе естиматион ин ухицх ыоу
      холд ме! и тханк ыоу фор експлаининг ит со фуллы. мы фаултс,
      аццординг то тхис цалцулатион, аре хеавы индеед! бут перхапс,”
      аддед хе, стоппинг ин хис уалк, анд турнинг тоуардс хер, “тхесе
      оффенсес мигхт хаве беен оверлоокед, хад нот ыоур приде беен хурт
      бы мы хонест цонфессион оф тхе сцруплес тхат хад лонг превентед
      мы форминг аны сериоус десигн. тхесе биттер аццусатионс мигхт
      хаве беен суппрессед, хад и, уитх греатер полицы, цонцеалед мы
      стругглес, анд флаттеред ыоу инто тхе белиеф оф мы беинг импеллед
      бы ункууалифиед, уналлоыед инцлинатион; бы реасон, бы рефлецтион,
      бы еверытхинг. бут дисгуисе оф еверы сорт ис мы абхорренце. нор
      ам и асхамед оф тхе феелингс и релатед. тхеы уере натурал анд
      жуст. цоулд ыоу експецт ме то режоице ин тхе инфериориты оф ыоур
      цоннецтионс?—то цонгратулате мыселф он тхе хопе оф релатионс,
      ухосе цондитион ин лифе ис со децидедлы бенеатх мы оун?”

      елизабетх фелт херселф гроуинг море ангры еверы момент; ыет схе
      триед то тхе утмост то спеак уитх цомпосуре ухен схе саид:

      “ыоу аре мистакен, мр. дарцы, иф ыоу суппосе тхат тхе моде оф
      ыоур децларатион аффецтед ме ин аны отхер уаы, тхан ас ит спаред
      ме тхе цонцерн ухицх и мигхт хаве фелт ин рефусинг ыоу, хад ыоу
      бехавед ин а море гентлеманлике маннер.”

      схе сау хим старт ат тхис, бут хе саид нотхинг, анд схе
      цонтинуед:

      “ыоу цоулд нот хаве маде тхе оффер оф ыоур ханд ин аны поссибле
      уаы тхат уоулд хаве темптед ме то аццепт ит.”

      агаин хис астонисхмент уас обвиоус; анд хе лоокед ат хер уитх ан
      експрессион оф минглед инцредулиты анд мортифицатион. схе уент он:

      “фром тхе веры бегиннинг—фром тхе фирст момент, и маы алмост
      саы—оф мы ацкууаинтанце уитх ыоу, ыоур маннерс, импрессинг ме уитх
      тхе фуллест белиеф оф ыоур арроганце, ыоур цонцеит, анд ыоур
      селфисх дисдаин оф тхе феелингс оф отхерс, уере суцх ас то форм
      тхе гроундуорк оф дисаппробатион он ухицх суццеединг евентс хаве
      буилт со иммовабле а дислике; анд и хад нот кноун ыоу а монтх
      бефоре и фелт тхат ыоу уере тхе ласт ман ин тхе уорлд ухом и
      цоулд евер бе преваилед он то марры.”

      “ыоу хаве саид кууите еноугх, мадам. и перфецтлы цомпрехенд ыоур
      феелингс, анд хаве ноу онлы то бе асхамед оф ухат мы оун хаве
      беен. форгиве ме фор хавинг такен уп со муцх оф ыоур тиме, анд
      аццепт мы бест уисхес фор ыоур хеалтх анд хаппинесс.”

      анд уитх тхесе уордс хе хастилы лефт тхе роом, анд елизабетх
      хеард хим тхе некст момент опен тхе фронт доор анд кууит тхе хоусе.

      тхе тумулт оф хер минд, уас ноу паинфуллы греат. схе кнеу нот хоу
      то суппорт херселф, анд фром ацтуал уеакнесс сат доун анд цриед
      фор халф-ан-хоур. хер астонисхмент, ас схе рефлецтед он ухат хад
      пассед, уас инцреасед бы еверы ревиеу оф ит. тхат схе схоулд
      рецеиве ан оффер оф марриаге фром мр. дарцы! тхат хе схоулд хаве
      беен ин лове уитх хер фор со маны монтхс! со муцх ин лове ас то
      уисх то марры хер ин спите оф алл тхе обжецтионс ухицх хад маде
      хим превент хис фриенд’с маррыинг хер систер, анд ухицх муст
      аппеар ат леаст уитх екууал форце ин хис оун цасе—уас алмост
      инцредибле! ит уас гратифыинг то хаве инспиред унцонсциоуслы со
      стронг ан аффецтион. бут хис приде, хис абоминабле приде—хис
      схамелесс авоуал оф ухат хе хад доне уитх респецт то жане—хис
      унпардонабле ассуранце ин ацкноуледгинг, тхоугх хе цоулд нот
      жустифы ит, анд тхе унфеелинг маннер ин ухицх хе хад ментионед
      мр. уицкхам, хис цруелты тоуардс ухом хе хад нот аттемптед то
      дены, соон оверцаме тхе питы ухицх тхе цонсидератион оф хис
      аттацхмент хад фор а момент ексцитед. схе цонтинуед ин веры
      агитатед рефлецтионс тилл тхе соунд оф лады цатхерине’с царриаге
      маде хер феел хоу унекууал схе уас то енцоунтер цхарлотте’с
      обсерватион, анд хурриед хер ауаы то хер роом.




      цхаптер 35

      елизабетх ауоке тхе некст морнинг то тхе саме тхоугхтс анд
      медитатионс ухицх хад ат ленгтх цлосед хер еыес. схе цоулд нот
      ыет рецовер фром тхе сурприсе оф ухат хад хаппенед; ит уас
      импоссибле то тхинк оф анытхинг елсе; анд, тоталлы индиспосед фор
      емплоымент, схе ресолвед, соон афтер бреакфаст, то индулге
      херселф ин аир анд ексерцисе. схе уас процеединг дирецтлы то хер
      фавоурите уалк, ухен тхе рецоллецтион оф мр. дарцы’с сометимес
      цоминг тхере стоппед хер, анд инстеад оф ентеринг тхе парк, схе
      турнед уп тхе лане, ухицх лед фартхер фром тхе турнпике-роад. тхе
      парк палинг уас стилл тхе боундары он оне сиде, анд схе соон
      пассед оне оф тхе гатес инто тхе гроунд.

      афтер уалкинг туо ор тхрее тимес алонг тхат парт оф тхе лане, схе
      уас темптед, бы тхе плеасантнесс оф тхе морнинг, то стоп ат тхе
      гатес анд лоок инто тхе парк. тхе фиве уеекс ухицх схе хад ноу
      пассед ин кент хад маде а греат дифференце ин тхе цоунтры, анд
      еверы даы уас аддинг то тхе вердуре оф тхе еарлы треес. схе уас
      он тхе поинт оф цонтинуинг хер уалк, ухен схе цаугхт а глимпсе оф
      а гентлеман уитхин тхе сорт оф грове ухицх едгед тхе парк; хе уас
      мовинг тхат уаы; анд, феарфул оф итс беинг мр. дарцы, схе уас
      дирецтлы ретреатинг. бут тхе персон ухо адванцед уас ноу неар
      еноугх то сее хер, анд степпинг форуард уитх еагернесс,
      проноунцед хер наме. схе хад турнед ауаы; бут он хеаринг херселф
      цаллед, тхоугх ин а воице ухицх провед ит то бе мр. дарцы, схе
      мовед агаин тоуардс тхе гате. хе хад бы тхат тиме реацхед ит
      алсо, анд, холдинг оут а леттер, ухицх схе инстинцтивелы тоок,
      саид, уитх а лоок оф хаугхты цомпосуре, “и хаве беен уалкинг ин
      тхе грове соме тиме ин тхе хопе оф меетинг ыоу. уилл ыоу до ме
      тхе хоноур оф реадинг тхат леттер?” анд тхен, уитх а слигхт боу,
      турнед агаин инто тхе плантатион, анд уас соон оут оф сигхт.

      уитх но експецтатион оф плеасуре, бут уитх тхе стронгест
      цуриоситы, елизабетх опенед тхе леттер, анд, то хер стилл
      инцреасинг уондер, перцеивед ан енвелопе цонтаининг туо схеетс оф
      леттер-папер, уриттен кууите тхроугх, ин а веры цлосе ханд. тхе
      енвелопе итселф уас ликеуисе фулл. пурсуинг хер уаы алонг тхе
      лане, схе тхен беган ит. ит уас датед фром росингс, ат еигхт
      о’цлоцк ин тхе морнинг, анд уас ас фоллоус:—

      “бе нот алармед, мадам, он рецеивинг тхис леттер, бы тхе
      аппрехенсион оф итс цонтаининг аны репетитион оф тхосе сентиментс
      ор ренеуал оф тхосе офферс ухицх уере ласт нигхт со дисгустинг то
      ыоу. и урите уитхоут аны интентион оф паининг ыоу, ор хумблинг
      мыселф, бы дуеллинг он уисхес ухицх, фор тхе хаппинесс оф ботх,
      цаннот бе тоо соон форготтен; анд тхе еффорт ухицх тхе форматион
      анд тхе перусал оф тхис леттер муст оццасион, схоулд хаве беен
      спаред, хад нот мы цхарацтер рекууиред ит то бе уриттен анд реад.
      ыоу муст, тхерефоре, пардон тхе фреедом уитх ухицх и деманд ыоур
      аттентион; ыоур феелингс, и кноу, уилл бестоу ит унуиллинглы, бут
      и деманд ит оф ыоур жустице.

      “туо оффенсес оф а веры дифферент натуре, анд бы но меанс оф
      екууал магнитуде, ыоу ласт нигхт лаид то мы цхарге. тхе фирст
      ментионед уас, тхат, регардлесс оф тхе сентиментс оф еитхер, и
      хад детацхед мр. бинглеы фром ыоур систер, анд тхе отхер, тхат и
      хад, ин дефианце оф вариоус цлаимс, ин дефианце оф хоноур анд
      хуманиты, руинед тхе иммедиате проспериты анд бластед тхе
      проспецтс оф мр. уицкхам. уилфуллы анд уантонлы то хаве тхроун
      офф тхе цомпанион оф мы ыоутх, тхе ацкноуледгед фавоурите оф мы
      фатхер, а ыоунг ман ухо хад сцарцелы аны отхер депенденце тхан он
      оур патронаге, анд ухо хад беен броугхт уп то експецт итс
      ексертион, уоулд бе а деправиты, то ухицх тхе сепаратион оф туо
      ыоунг персонс, ухосе аффецтион цоулд бе тхе гроутх оф онлы а феу
      уеекс, цоулд беар но цомпарисон. бут фром тхе севериты оф тхат
      бламе ухицх уас ласт нигхт со либераллы бестоуед, респецтинг еацх
      цирцумстанце, и схалл хопе то бе ин тхе футуре сецуред, ухен тхе
      фоллоуинг аццоунт оф мы ацтионс анд тхеир мотивес хас беен реад.
      иф, ин тхе експланатион оф тхем, ухицх ис дуе то мыселф, и ам
      ундер тхе нецесситы оф релатинг феелингс ухицх маы бе оффенсиве
      то ыоурс, и цан онлы саы тхат и ам сорры. тхе нецесситы муст бе
      обеыед, анд фуртхер апологы уоулд бе абсурд.

      “и хад нот беен лонг ин хертфордсхире, бефоре и сау, ин цоммон
      уитх отхерс, тхат бинглеы преферред ыоур елдер систер то аны
      отхер ыоунг уоман ин тхе цоунтры. бут ит уас нот тилл тхе евенинг
      оф тхе данце ат нетхерфиелд тхат и хад аны аппрехенсион оф хис
      феелинг а сериоус аттацхмент. и хад офтен сеен хим ин лове
      бефоре. ат тхат балл, ухиле и хад тхе хоноур оф данцинг уитх ыоу,
      и уас фирст маде ацкууаинтед, бы сир уиллиам луцас’с аццидентал
      информатион, тхат бинглеы’с аттентионс то ыоур систер хад гивен
      рисе то а генерал експецтатион оф тхеир марриаге. хе споке оф ит
      ас а цертаин евент, оф ухицх тхе тиме алоне цоулд бе ундецидед.
      фром тхат момент и обсервед мы фриенд’с бехавиоур аттентивелы;
      анд и цоулд тхен перцеиве тхат хис партиалиты фор мисс беннет уас
      беыонд ухат и хад евер уитнессед ин хим. ыоур систер и алсо
      уатцхед. хер лоок анд маннерс уере опен, цхеерфул, анд енгагинг
      ас евер, бут уитхоут аны сымптом оф пецулиар регард, анд и
      ремаинед цонвинцед фром тхе евенинг’с сцрутины, тхат тхоугх схе
      рецеивед хис аттентионс уитх плеасуре, схе дид нот инвите тхем бы
      аны партиципатион оф сентимент. иф _ыоу_ хаве нот беен мистакен
      хере, _и_ муст хаве беен ин еррор. ыоур супериор кноуледге оф
      ыоур систер муст маке тхе латтер пробабле. иф ит бе со, иф и хаве
      беен мислед бы суцх еррор то инфлицт паин он хер, ыоур ресентмент
      хас нот беен унреасонабле. бут и схалл нот сцрупле то ассерт,
      тхат тхе серениты оф ыоур систер’с цоунтенанце анд аир уас суцх
      ас мигхт хаве гивен тхе мост ацуте обсервер а цонвицтион тхат,
      хоуевер амиабле хер темпер, хер хеарт уас нот ликелы то бе еасилы
      тоуцхед. тхат и уас десироус оф белиевинг хер индифферент ис
      цертаин—бут и уилл вентуре то саы тхат мы инвестигатион анд
      децисионс аре нот усуаллы инфлуенцед бы мы хопес ор феарс. и дид
      нот белиеве хер то бе индифферент бецаусе и уисхед ит; и белиевед
      ит он импартиал цонвицтион, ас трулы ас и уисхед ит ин реасон. мы
      обжецтионс то тхе марриаге уере нот мерелы тхосе ухицх и ласт
      нигхт ацкноуледгед то хаве тхе утмост форце оф пассион то пут
      асиде, ин мы оун цасе; тхе уант оф цоннецтион цоулд нот бе со
      греат ан евил то мы фриенд ас то ме. бут тхере уере отхер цаусес
      оф репугнанце; цаусес ухицх, тхоугх стилл ексистинг, анд ексистинг
      то ан екууал дегрее ин ботх инстанцес, и хад мыселф ендеавоуред то
      форгет, бецаусе тхеы уере нот иммедиателы бефоре ме. тхесе цаусес
      муст бе статед, тхоугх бриефлы. тхе ситуатион оф ыоур мотхер’с
      фамилы, тхоугх обжецтионабле, уас нотхинг ин цомпарисон то тхат
      тотал уант оф проприеты со фрекууентлы, со алмост униформлы
      бетраыед бы херселф, бы ыоур тхрее ыоунгер систерс, анд
      оццасионаллы евен бы ыоур фатхер. пардон ме. ит паинс ме то
      оффенд ыоу. бут амидст ыоур цонцерн фор тхе дефецтс оф ыоур
      неарест релатионс, анд ыоур дисплеасуре ат тхис репресентатион оф
      тхем, лет ит гиве ыоу цонсолатион то цонсидер тхат, то хаве
      цондуцтед ыоурселвес со ас то авоид аны схаре оф тхе лике
      ценсуре, ис праисе но лесс генераллы бестоуед он ыоу анд ыоур
      елдер систер, тхан ит ис хоноурабле то тхе сенсе анд диспоситион
      оф ботх. и уилл онлы саы фартхер тхат фром ухат пассед тхат
      евенинг, мы опинион оф алл партиес уас цонфирмед, анд еверы
      индуцемент хеигхтенед ухицх цоулд хаве лед ме бефоре, то пресерве
      мы фриенд фром ухат и естеемед а мост унхаппы цоннецтион. хе лефт
      нетхерфиелд фор лондон, он тхе даы фоллоуинг, ас ыоу, и ам
      цертаин, ремембер, уитх тхе десигн оф соон ретурнинг.

      “тхе парт ухицх и ацтед ис ноу то бе експлаинед. хис систерс’
      унеасинесс хад беен екууаллы ексцитед уитх мы оун; оур цоинциденце
      оф феелинг уас соон дисцоверед, анд, алике сенсибле тхат но тиме
      уас то бе лост ин детацхинг тхеир бротхер, уе схортлы ресолвед он
      жоининг хим дирецтлы ин лондон. уе аццординглы уент—анд тхере и
      реадилы енгагед ин тхе оффице оф поинтинг оут то мы фриенд тхе
      цертаин евилс оф суцх а цхоице. и десцрибед, анд енфорцед тхем
      еарнестлы. бут, хоуевер тхис ремонстранце мигхт хаве стаггеред ор
      делаыед хис детерминатион, и до нот суппосе тхат ит уоулд
      ултимателы хаве превентед тхе марриаге, хад ит нот беен сецондед
      бы тхе ассуранце тхат и хеситатед нот ин гивинг, оф ыоур систер’с
      индифференце. хе хад бефоре белиевед хер то ретурн хис аффецтион
      уитх синцере, иф нот уитх екууал регард. бут бинглеы хас греат
      натурал модесты, уитх а стронгер депенденце он мы жудгемент тхан
      он хис оун. то цонвинце хим, тхерефоре, тхат хе хад децеивед
      химселф, уас но веры диффицулт поинт. то персуаде хим агаинст
      ретурнинг инто хертфордсхире, ухен тхат цонвицтион хад беен
      гивен, уас сцарцелы тхе уорк оф а момент. и цаннот бламе мыселф
      фор хавинг доне тхус муцх. тхере ис бут оне парт оф мы цондуцт ин
      тхе ухоле аффаир он ухицх и до нот рефлецт уитх сатисфацтион; ит
      ис тхат и цондесцендед то адопт тхе меасурес оф арт со фар ас то
      цонцеал фром хим ыоур систер’с беинг ин тоун. и кнеу ит мыселф,
      ас ит уас кноун то мисс бинглеы; бут хер бротхер ис евен ыет
      игнорант оф ит. тхат тхеы мигхт хаве мет уитхоут илл цонсекууенце
      ис перхапс пробабле; бут хис регард дид нот аппеар то ме еноугх
      екстингуисхед фор хим то сее хер уитхоут соме дангер. перхапс тхис
      цонцеалмент, тхис дисгуисе уас бенеатх ме; ит ис доне, хоуевер,
      анд ит уас доне фор тхе бест. он тхис субжецт и хаве нотхинг море
      то саы, но отхер апологы то оффер. иф и хаве уоундед ыоур
      систер’с феелингс, ит уас ункноуинглы доне анд тхоугх тхе мотивес
      ухицх говернед ме маы то ыоу веры натураллы аппеар инсуффициент,
      и хаве нот ыет леарнт то цондемн тхем.

      “уитх респецт то тхат отхер, море уеигхты аццусатион, оф хавинг
      инжуред мр. уицкхам, и цан онлы рефуте ит бы лаыинг бефоре ыоу
      тхе ухоле оф хис цоннецтион уитх мы фамилы. оф ухат хе хас
      _партицуларлы_ аццусед ме и ам игнорант; бут оф тхе трутх оф ухат
      и схалл релате, и цан суммон море тхан оне уитнесс оф ундоубтед
      верациты.

      “мр. уицкхам ис тхе сон оф а веры респецтабле ман, ухо хад фор
      маны ыеарс тхе манагемент оф алл тхе пемберлеы естатес, анд ухосе
      гоод цондуцт ин тхе дисцхарге оф хис труст натураллы инцлинед мы
      фатхер то бе оф сервице то хим; анд он георге уицкхам, ухо уас
      хис годсон, хис кинднесс уас тхерефоре либераллы бестоуед. мы
      фатхер суппортед хим ат сцхоол, анд афтеруардс ат цамбридге—мост
      импортант ассистанце, ас хис оун фатхер, алуаыс поор фром тхе
      екстраваганце оф хис уифе, уоулд хаве беен унабле то гиве хим а
      гентлеман’с едуцатион. мы фатхер уас нот онлы фонд оф тхис ыоунг
      ман’с социеты, ухосе маннерс уере алуаыс енгагинг; хе хад алсо
      тхе хигхест опинион оф хим, анд хопинг тхе цхурцх уоулд бе хис
      профессион, интендед то провиде фор хим ин ит. ас фор мыселф, ит
      ис маны, маны ыеарс синце и фирст беган то тхинк оф хим ин а веры
      дифферент маннер. тхе вициоус пропенситиес—тхе уант оф принципле,
      ухицх хе уас царефул то гуард фром тхе кноуледге оф хис бест
      фриенд, цоулд нот есцапе тхе обсерватион оф а ыоунг ман оф неарлы
      тхе саме аге уитх химселф, анд ухо хад оппортунитиес оф сееинг
      хим ин унгуардед моментс, ухицх мр. дарцы цоулд нот хаве. хере
      агаин и схалл гиве ыоу паин—то ухат дегрее ыоу онлы цан телл. бут
      ухатевер маы бе тхе сентиментс ухицх мр. уицкхам хас цреатед, а
      суспицион оф тхеир натуре схалл нот превент ме фром унфолдинг хис
      реал цхарацтер—ит аддс евен анотхер мотиве.

      “мы ексцеллент фатхер диед абоут фиве ыеарс аго; анд хис
      аттацхмент то мр. уицкхам уас то тхе ласт со стеады, тхат ин хис
      уилл хе партицуларлы рецоммендед ит то ме, то промоте хис
      адванцемент ин тхе бест маннер тхат хис профессион мигхт
      аллоу—анд иф хе тоок ордерс, десиред тхат а валуабле фамилы
      ливинг мигхт бе хис ас соон ас ит бецаме вацант. тхере уас алсо а
      легацы оф оне тхоусанд поундс. хис оун фатхер дид нот лонг
      сурвиве мине, анд уитхин халф а ыеар фром тхесе евентс, мр.
      уицкхам уроте то информ ме тхат, хавинг финаллы ресолвед агаинст
      такинг ордерс, хе хопед и схоулд нот тхинк ит унреасонабле фор
      хим то експецт соме море иммедиате пецуниары адвантаге, ин лиеу оф
      тхе префермент, бы ухицх хе цоулд нот бе бенефитед. хе хад соме
      интентион, хе аддед, оф студыинг лау, анд и муст бе ауаре тхат
      тхе интерест оф оне тхоусанд поундс уоулд бе а веры инсуффициент
      суппорт тхереин. и ратхер уисхед, тхан белиевед хим то бе
      синцере; бут, ат аны рате, уас перфецтлы реады то аццеде то хис
      пропосал. и кнеу тхат мр. уицкхам оугхт нот то бе а цлергыман;
      тхе бусинесс уас тхерефоре соон сеттлед—хе ресигнед алл цлаим то
      ассистанце ин тхе цхурцх, уере ит поссибле тхат хе цоулд евер бе
      ин а ситуатион то рецеиве ит, анд аццептед ин ретурн тхрее
      тхоусанд поундс. алл цоннецтион бетуеен ус сеемед ноу диссолвед.
      и тхоугхт тоо илл оф хим то инвите хим то пемберлеы, ор адмит хис
      социеты ин тоун. ин тоун и белиеве хе цхиефлы ливед, бут хис
      студыинг тхе лау уас а мере претенце, анд беинг ноу фрее фром алл
      рестраинт, хис лифе уас а лифе оф идленесс анд диссипатион. фор
      абоут тхрее ыеарс и хеард литтле оф хим; бут он тхе децеасе оф
      тхе инцумбент оф тхе ливинг ухицх хад беен десигнед фор хим, хе
      апплиед то ме агаин бы леттер фор тхе пресентатион. хис
      цирцумстанцес, хе ассуред ме, анд и хад но диффицулты ин
      белиевинг ит, уере ексцеединглы бад. хе хад фоунд тхе лау а мост
      унпрофитабле студы, анд уас ноу абсолутелы ресолвед он беинг
      ордаинед, иф и уоулд пресент хим то тхе ливинг ин кууестион—оф
      ухицх хе трустед тхере цоулд бе литтле доубт, ас хе уас уелл
      ассуред тхат и хад но отхер персон то провиде фор, анд и цоулд
      нот хаве форготтен мы реверед фатхер’с интентионс. ыоу уилл
      хардлы бламе ме фор рефусинг то цомплы уитх тхис ентреаты, ор фор
      ресистинг еверы репетитион то ит. хис ресентмент уас ин
      пропортион то тхе дистресс оф хис цирцумстанцес—анд хе уас
      доубтлесс ас виолент ин хис абусе оф ме то отхерс ас ин хис
      репроацхес то мыселф. афтер тхис период еверы аппеаранце оф
      ацкууаинтанце уас дроппед. хоу хе ливед и кноу нот. бут ласт
      суммер хе уас агаин мост паинфуллы обтрудед он мы нотице.

      “и муст ноу ментион а цирцумстанце ухицх и уоулд уисх то форгет
      мыселф, анд ухицх но облигатион лесс тхан тхе пресент схоулд
      индуце ме то унфолд то аны хуман беинг. хавинг саид тхус муцх, и
      феел но доубт оф ыоур сецрецы. мы систер, ухо ис море тхан тен
      ыеарс мы жуниор, уас лефт то тхе гуардиансхип оф мы мотхер’с
      непхеу, цолонел фитзуиллиам, анд мыселф. абоут а ыеар аго, схе
      уас такен фром сцхоол, анд ан естаблисхмент формед фор хер ин
      лондон; анд ласт суммер схе уент уитх тхе лады ухо пресидед овер
      ит, то рамсгате; анд тхитхер алсо уент мр. уицкхам, ундоубтедлы
      бы десигн; фор тхере провед то хаве беен а приор ацкууаинтанце
      бетуеен хим анд мрс. ыоунге, ин ухосе цхарацтер уе уере мост
      унхаппилы децеивед; анд бы хер цонниванце анд аид, хе со фар
      рецоммендед химселф то георгиана, ухосе аффецтионате хеарт
      ретаинед а стронг импрессион оф хис кинднесс то хер ас а цхилд,
      тхат схе уас персуадед то белиеве херселф ин лове, анд то цонсент
      то ан елопемент. схе уас тхен бут фифтеен, ухицх муст бе хер
      ексцусе; анд афтер статинг хер импруденце, и ам хаппы то адд, тхат
      и оуед тхе кноуледге оф ит то херселф. и жоинед тхем унекспецтедлы
      а даы ор туо бефоре тхе интендед елопемент, анд тхен георгиана,
      унабле то суппорт тхе идеа оф гриевинг анд оффендинг а бротхер
      ухом схе алмост лоокед уп то ас а фатхер, ацкноуледгед тхе ухоле
      то ме. ыоу маы имагине ухат и фелт анд хоу и ацтед. регард фор мы
      систер’с цредит анд феелингс превентед аны публиц експосуре; бут и
      уроте то мр. уицкхам, ухо лефт тхе плаце иммедиателы, анд мрс.
      ыоунге уас оф цоурсе ремовед фром хер цхарге. мр. уицкхам’с цхиеф
      обжецт уас ункууестионаблы мы систер’с фортуне, ухицх ис тхирты
      тхоусанд поундс; бут и цаннот хелп суппосинг тхат тхе хопе оф
      ревенгинг химселф он ме уас а стронг индуцемент. хис ревенге
      уоулд хаве беен цомплете индеед.

      “тхис, мадам, ис а фаитхфул нарративе оф еверы евент ин ухицх уе
      хаве беен цонцернед тогетхер; анд иф ыоу до нот абсолутелы режецт
      ит ас фалсе, ыоу уилл, и хопе, ацкууит ме хенцефортх оф цруелты
      тоуардс мр. уицкхам. и кноу нот ин ухат маннер, ундер ухат форм
      оф фалсехоод хе хад импосед он ыоу; бут хис суццесс ис нот
      перхапс то бе уондеред ат. игнорант ас ыоу превиоуслы уере оф
      еверытхинг цонцернинг еитхер, детецтион цоулд нот бе ин ыоур
      поуер, анд суспицион цертаинлы нот ин ыоур инцлинатион.

      “ыоу маы поссиблы уондер ухы алл тхис уас нот толд ыоу ласт
      нигхт; бут и уас нот тхен мастер еноугх оф мыселф то кноу ухат
      цоулд ор оугхт то бе ревеалед. фор тхе трутх оф еверытхинг хере
      релатед, и цан аппеал море партицуларлы то тхе тестимоны оф
      цолонел фитзуиллиам, ухо, фром оур неар релатионсхип анд цонстант
      интимацы, анд, стилл море, ас оне оф тхе ексецуторс оф мы фатхер’с
      уилл, хас беен унавоидаблы ацкууаинтед уитх еверы партицулар оф
      тхесе трансацтионс. иф ыоур абхорренце оф _ме_ схоулд маке _мы_
      ассертионс валуелесс, ыоу цаннот бе превентед бы тхе саме цаусе
      фром цонфидинг ин мы цоусин; анд тхат тхере маы бе тхе
      поссибилиты оф цонсултинг хим, и схалл ендеавоур то финд соме
      оппортуниты оф путтинг тхис леттер ин ыоур хандс ин тхе цоурсе оф
      тхе морнинг. и уилл онлы адд, год блесс ыоу.

      “фитзуиллиам дарцы”




      цхаптер 36

      иф елизабетх, ухен мр. дарцы гаве хер тхе леттер, дид нот експецт
      ит то цонтаин а ренеуал оф хис офферс, схе хад формед но
      експецтатион ат алл оф итс цонтентс. бут суцх ас тхеы уере, ит маы
      уелл бе суппосед хоу еагерлы схе уент тхроугх тхем, анд ухат а
      цонтрариеты оф емотион тхеы ексцитед. хер феелингс ас схе реад
      уере сцарцелы то бе дефинед. уитх амаземент дид схе фирст
      ундерстанд тхат хе белиевед аны апологы то бе ин хис поуер; анд
      стеадфастлы уас схе персуадед, тхат хе цоулд хаве но експланатион
      то гиве, ухицх а жуст сенсе оф схаме уоулд нот цонцеал. уитх а
      стронг прежудице агаинст еверытхинг хе мигхт саы, схе беган хис
      аццоунт оф ухат хад хаппенед ат нетхерфиелд. схе реад уитх ан
      еагернесс ухицх хардлы лефт хер поуер оф цомпрехенсион, анд фром
      импатиенце оф кноуинг ухат тхе некст сентенце мигхт бринг, уас
      инцапабле оф аттендинг то тхе сенсе оф тхе оне бефоре хер еыес.
      хис белиеф оф хер систер’с инсенсибилиты схе инстантлы ресолвед
      то бе фалсе; анд хис аццоунт оф тхе реал, тхе уорст обжецтионс то
      тхе матцх, маде хер тоо ангры то хаве аны уисх оф доинг хим
      жустице. хе експрессед но регрет фор ухат хе хад доне ухицх
      сатисфиед хер; хис стыле уас нот пенитент, бут хаугхты. ит уас
      алл приде анд инсоленце.

      бут ухен тхис субжецт уас суццеедед бы хис аццоунт оф мр.
      уицкхам—ухен схе реад уитх сомеухат цлеарер аттентион а релатион
      оф евентс ухицх, иф труе, муст овертхроу еверы цхерисхед опинион
      оф хис уортх, анд ухицх боре со аларминг ан аффиниты то хис оун
      хисторы оф химселф—хер феелингс уере ыет море ацутелы паинфул анд
      море диффицулт оф дефинитион. астонисхмент, аппрехенсион, анд
      евен хоррор, оппрессед хер. схе уисхед то дисцредит ит ентирелы,
      репеатедлы ексцлаиминг, “тхис муст бе фалсе! тхис цаннот бе! тхис
      муст бе тхе гроссест фалсехоод!”—анд ухен схе хад гоне тхроугх
      тхе ухоле леттер, тхоугх сцарцелы кноуинг анытхинг оф тхе ласт
      паге ор туо, пут ит хастилы ауаы, протестинг тхат схе уоулд нот
      регард ит, тхат схе уоулд невер лоок ин ит агаин.

      ин тхис пертурбед стате оф минд, уитх тхоугхтс тхат цоулд рест он
      нотхинг, схе уалкед он; бут ит уоулд нот до; ин халф а минуте тхе
      леттер уас унфолдед агаин, анд цоллецтинг херселф ас уелл ас схе
      цоулд, схе агаин беган тхе мортифыинг перусал оф алл тхат релатед
      то уицкхам, анд цоммандед херселф со фар ас то ексамине тхе
      меанинг оф еверы сентенце. тхе аццоунт оф хис цоннецтион уитх тхе
      пемберлеы фамилы уас ексацтлы ухат хе хад релатед химселф; анд тхе
      кинднесс оф тхе лате мр. дарцы, тхоугх схе хад нот бефоре кноун
      итс екстент, агреед екууаллы уелл уитх хис оун уордс. со фар еацх
      рецитал цонфирмед тхе отхер; бут ухен схе цаме то тхе уилл, тхе
      дифференце уас греат. ухат уицкхам хад саид оф тхе ливинг уас
      фресх ин хер меморы, анд ас схе рецаллед хис веры уордс, ит уас
      импоссибле нот то феел тхат тхере уас гросс дуплициты он оне сиде
      ор тхе отхер; анд, фор а феу моментс, схе флаттеред херселф тхат
      хер уисхес дид нот ерр. бут ухен схе реад анд ре-реад уитх тхе
      цлосест аттентион, тхе партицуларс иммедиателы фоллоуинг оф
      уицкхам’с ресигнинг алл претенсионс то тхе ливинг, оф хис
      рецеивинг ин лиеу со цонсидерабле а сум ас тхрее тхоусанд поундс,
      агаин уас схе форцед то хеситате. схе пут доун тхе леттер,
      уеигхед еверы цирцумстанце уитх ухат схе меант то бе
      импартиалиты—делибератед он тхе пробабилиты оф еацх статемент—бут
      уитх литтле суццесс. он ботх сидес ит уас онлы ассертион. агаин
      схе реад он; бут еверы лине провед море цлеарлы тхат тхе аффаир,
      ухицх схе хад белиевед ит импоссибле тхат аны цонтриванце цоулд
      со репресент ас то рендер мр. дарцы’с цондуцт ин ит лесс тхан
      инфамоус, уас цапабле оф а турн ухицх муст маке хим ентирелы
      бламелесс тхроугхоут тхе ухоле.

      тхе екстраваганце анд генерал профлигацы ухицх хе сцруплед нот то
      лаы ат мр. уицкхам’с цхарге, ексцеединглы схоцкед хер; тхе море
      со, ас схе цоулд бринг но прооф оф итс инжустице. схе хад невер
      хеард оф хим бефоре хис ентранце инто тхе ——схире милитиа, ин
      ухицх хе хад енгагед ат тхе персуасион оф тхе ыоунг ман ухо, он
      меетинг хим ацциденталлы ин тоун, хад тхере ренеуед а слигхт
      ацкууаинтанце. оф хис формер уаы оф лифе нотхинг хад беен кноун ин
      хертфордсхире бут ухат хе толд химселф. ас то хис реал цхарацтер,
      хад информатион беен ин хер поуер, схе хад невер фелт а уисх оф
      инкууиринг. хис цоунтенанце, воице, анд маннер хад естаблисхед хим
      ат онце ин тхе поссессион оф еверы виртуе. схе триед то рецоллецт
      соме инстанце оф гооднесс, соме дистингуисхед траит оф интегриты
      ор беневоленце, тхат мигхт ресцуе хим фром тхе аттацкс оф мр.
      дарцы; ор ат леаст, бы тхе предоминанце оф виртуе, атоне фор
      тхосе цасуал еррорс ундер ухицх схе уоулд ендеавоур то цласс ухат
      мр. дарцы хад десцрибед ас тхе идленесс анд вице оф маны ыеарс’
      цонтинуанце. бут но суцх рецоллецтион бефриендед хер. схе цоулд
      сее хим инстантлы бефоре хер, ин еверы цхарм оф аир анд аддресс;
      бут схе цоулд ремембер но море субстантиал гоод тхан тхе генерал
      аппробатион оф тхе неигхбоурхоод, анд тхе регард ухицх хис социал
      поуерс хад гаинед хим ин тхе месс. афтер паусинг он тхис поинт а
      цонсидерабле ухиле, схе онце море цонтинуед то реад. бут, алас!
      тхе сторы ухицх фоллоуед, оф хис десигнс он мисс дарцы, рецеивед
      соме цонфирматион фром ухат хад пассед бетуеен цолонел
      фитзуиллиам анд херселф онлы тхе морнинг бефоре; анд ат ласт схе
      уас реферред фор тхе трутх оф еверы партицулар то цолонел
      фитзуиллиам химселф—фром ухом схе хад превиоуслы рецеивед тхе
      информатион оф хис неар цонцерн ин алл хис цоусин’с аффаирс, анд
      ухосе цхарацтер схе хад но реасон то кууестион. ат оне тиме схе
      хад алмост ресолвед он апплыинг то хим, бут тхе идеа уас цхецкед
      бы тхе аукуарднесс оф тхе апплицатион, анд ат ленгтх ухоллы
      банисхед бы тхе цонвицтион тхат мр. дарцы уоулд невер хаве
      хазардед суцх а пропосал, иф хе хад нот беен уелл ассуред оф хис
      цоусин’с цорроборатион.

      схе перфецтлы ремемберед еверытхинг тхат хад пассед ин
      цонверсатион бетуеен уицкхам анд херселф, ин тхеир фирст евенинг
      ат мр. пхиллипс’с. маны оф хис експрессионс уере стилл фресх ин
      хер меморы. схе уас _ноу_ струцк уитх тхе импроприеты оф суцх
      цоммуницатионс то а странгер, анд уондеред ит хад есцапед хер
      бефоре. схе сау тхе инделицацы оф путтинг химселф форуард ас хе
      хад доне, анд тхе инцонсистенцы оф хис профессионс уитх хис
      цондуцт. схе ремемберед тхат хе хад боастед оф хавинг но феар оф
      сееинг мр. дарцы—тхат мр. дарцы мигхт леаве тхе цоунтры, бут тхат
      _хе_ схоулд станд хис гроунд; ыет хе хад авоидед тхе нетхерфиелд
      балл тхе веры некст уеек. схе ремемберед алсо тхат, тилл тхе
      нетхерфиелд фамилы хад кууиттед тхе цоунтры, хе хад толд хис сторы
      то но оне бут херселф; бут тхат афтер тхеир ремовал ит хад беен
      еверыухере дисцуссед; тхат хе хад тхен но ресервес, но сцруплес
      ин синкинг мр. дарцы’с цхарацтер, тхоугх хе хад ассуред хер тхат
      респецт фор тхе фатхер уоулд алуаыс превент хис експосинг тхе сон.

      хоу дифферентлы дид еверытхинг ноу аппеар ин ухицх хе уас
      цонцернед! хис аттентионс то мисс кинг уере ноу тхе цонсекууенце
      оф виеус солелы анд хатефуллы мерценары; анд тхе медиоцриты оф
      хер фортуне провед но лонгер тхе модератион оф хис уисхес, бут
      хис еагернесс то грасп ат анытхинг. хис бехавиоур то херселф
      цоулд ноу хаве хад но толерабле мотиве; хе хад еитхер беен
      децеивед уитх регард то хер фортуне, ор хад беен гратифыинг хис
      ваниты бы енцоурагинг тхе преференце ухицх схе белиевед схе хад
      мост инцаутиоуслы схоун. еверы лингеринг струггле ин хис фавоур
      греу фаинтер анд фаинтер; анд ин фартхер жустифицатион оф мр.
      дарцы, схе цоулд нот бут аллоу тхат мр. бинглеы, ухен кууестионед
      бы жане, хад лонг аго ассертед хис бламелесснесс ин тхе аффаир;
      тхат проуд анд репулсиве ас уере хис маннерс, схе хад невер, ин
      тхе ухоле цоурсе оф тхеир ацкууаинтанце—ан ацкууаинтанце ухицх хад
      латтерлы броугхт тхем муцх тогетхер, анд гивен хер а сорт оф
      интимацы уитх хис уаыс—сеен анытхинг тхат бетраыед хим то бе
      унпринциплед ор унжуст—анытхинг тхат споке хим оф иррелигиоус ор
      имморал хабитс; тхат амонг хис оун цоннецтионс хе уас естеемед
      анд валуед—тхат евен уицкхам хад аллоуед хим мерит ас а бротхер,
      анд тхат схе хад офтен хеард хим спеак со аффецтионателы оф хис
      систер ас то прове хим цапабле оф соме амиабле феелинг; тхат хад
      хис ацтионс беен ухат мр. уицкхам репресентед тхем, со гросс а
      виолатион оф еверытхинг ригхт цоулд хардлы хаве беен цонцеалед
      фром тхе уорлд; анд тхат фриендсхип бетуеен а персон цапабле оф
      ит, анд суцх ан амиабле ман ас мр. бинглеы, уас инцомпрехенсибле.

      схе греу абсолутелы асхамед оф херселф. оф неитхер дарцы нор
      уицкхам цоулд схе тхинк уитхоут феелинг схе хад беен блинд,
      партиал, прежудицед, абсурд.

      “хоу деспицаблы и хаве ацтед!” схе цриед; “и, ухо хаве придед
      мыселф он мы дисцернмент! и, ухо хаве валуед мыселф он мы
      абилитиес! ухо хаве офтен дисдаинед тхе генероус цандоур оф мы
      систер, анд гратифиед мы ваниты ин уселесс ор бламеабле миструст!
      хоу хумилиатинг ис тхис дисцоверы! ыет, хоу жуст а хумилиатион!
      хад и беен ин лове, и цоулд нот хаве беен море уретцхедлы блинд!
      бут ваниты, нот лове, хас беен мы фоллы. плеасед уитх тхе
      преференце оф оне, анд оффендед бы тхе неглецт оф тхе отхер, он
      тхе веры бегиннинг оф оур ацкууаинтанце, и хаве цоуртед
      препоссессион анд игноранце, анд дривен реасон ауаы, ухере еитхер
      уере цонцернед. тилл тхис момент и невер кнеу мыселф.”

      фром херселф то жане—фром жане то бинглеы, хер тхоугхтс уере ин а
      лине ухицх соон броугхт то хер рецоллецтион тхат мр. дарцы’с
      експланатион _тхере_ хад аппеаред веры инсуффициент, анд схе реад
      ит агаин. уиделы дифферент уас тхе еффецт оф а сецонд перусал.
      хоу цоулд схе дены тхат цредит то хис ассертионс ин оне инстанце,
      ухицх схе хад беен облигед то гиве ин тхе отхер? хе децларед
      химселф то бе тоталлы унсуспициоус оф хер систер’с аттацхмент;
      анд схе цоулд нот хелп ремемберинг ухат цхарлотте’с опинион хад
      алуаыс беен. неитхер цоулд схе дены тхе жустице оф хис
      десцриптион оф жане. схе фелт тхат жане’с феелингс, тхоугх
      фервент, уере литтле дисплаыед, анд тхат тхере уас а цонстант
      цомплаценцы ин хер аир анд маннер нот офтен унитед уитх греат
      сенсибилиты.

      ухен схе цаме то тхат парт оф тхе леттер ин ухицх хер фамилы уере
      ментионед ин термс оф суцх мортифыинг, ыет меритед репроацх, хер
      сенсе оф схаме уас севере. тхе жустице оф тхе цхарге струцк хер
      тоо форциблы фор дениал, анд тхе цирцумстанцес то ухицх хе
      партицуларлы аллудед ас хавинг пассед ат тхе нетхерфиелд балл,
      анд ас цонфирминг алл хис фирст дисаппробатион, цоулд нот хаве
      маде а стронгер импрессион он хис минд тхан он херс.

      тхе цомплимент то херселф анд хер систер уас нот унфелт. ит
      соотхед, бут ит цоулд нот цонсоле хер фор тхе цонтемпт ухицх хад
      тхус беен селф-аттрацтед бы тхе рест оф хер фамилы; анд ас схе
      цонсидеред тхат жане’с дисаппоинтмент хад ин фацт беен тхе уорк
      оф хер неарест релатионс, анд рефлецтед хоу материаллы тхе цредит
      оф ботх муст бе хурт бы суцх импроприеты оф цондуцт, схе фелт
      депрессед беыонд анытхинг схе хад евер кноун бефоре.

      афтер уандеринг алонг тхе лане фор туо хоурс, гивинг уаы то еверы
      вариеты оф тхоугхт—ре-цонсидеринг евентс, детермининг
      пробабилитиес, анд рецонцилинг херселф, ас уелл ас схе цоулд, то
      а цханге со судден анд со импортант, фатигуе, анд а рецоллецтион
      оф хер лонг абсенце, маде хер ат ленгтх ретурн хоме; анд схе
      ентеред тхе хоусе уитх тхе уисх оф аппеаринг цхеерфул ас усуал,
      анд тхе ресолутион оф репрессинг суцх рефлецтионс ас муст маке
      хер унфит фор цонверсатион.

      схе уас иммедиателы толд тхат тхе туо гентлемен фром росингс хад
      еацх цаллед дуринг хер абсенце; мр. дарцы, онлы фор а феу
      минутес, то таке леаве—бут тхат цолонел фитзуиллиам хад беен
      ситтинг уитх тхем ат леаст ан хоур, хопинг фор хер ретурн, анд
      алмост ресолвинг то уалк афтер хер тилл схе цоулд бе фоунд.
      елизабетх цоулд бут жуст _аффецт_ цонцерн ин миссинг хим; схе
      реаллы режоицед ат ит. цолонел фитзуиллиам уас но лонгер ан
      обжецт; схе цоулд тхинк онлы оф хер леттер.




      цхаптер 37

      тхе туо гентлемен лефт росингс тхе некст морнинг, анд мр. цоллинс
      хавинг беен ин уаитинг неар тхе лодгес, то маке тхем хис партинг
      обеисанце, уас абле то бринг хоме тхе плеасинг интеллигенце, оф
      тхеир аппеаринг ин веры гоод хеалтх, анд ин ас толерабле спиритс
      ас цоулд бе експецтед, афтер тхе меланцхолы сцене со лателы гоне
      тхроугх ат росингс. то росингс хе тхен хастенед, то цонсоле лады
      цатхерине анд хер даугхтер; анд он хис ретурн броугхт бацк, уитх
      греат сатисфацтион, а мессаге фром хер ладысхип, импортинг тхат
      схе фелт херселф со дулл ас то маке хер веры десироус оф хавинг
      тхем алл то дине уитх хер.

      елизабетх цоулд нот сее лады цатхерине уитхоут рецоллецтинг тхат,
      хад схе цхосен ит, схе мигхт бы тхис тиме хаве беен пресентед то
      хер ас хер футуре ниеце; нор цоулд схе тхинк, уитхоут а смиле, оф
      ухат хер ладысхип’с индигнатион уоулд хаве беен. “ухат уоулд схе
      хаве саид? хоу уоулд схе хаве бехавед?” уере кууестионс уитх ухицх
      схе амусед херселф.

      тхеир фирст субжецт уас тхе диминутион оф тхе росингс парты. “и
      ассуре ыоу, и феел ит ексцеединглы,” саид лады цатхерине; “и
      белиеве но оне феелс тхе лосс оф фриендс со муцх ас и до. бут и
      ам партицуларлы аттацхед то тхесе ыоунг мен, анд кноу тхем то бе
      со муцх аттацхед то ме! тхеы уере ексцессивелы сорры то го! бут со
      тхеы алуаыс аре. тхе деар цолонел раллиед хис спиритс толераблы
      тилл жуст ат ласт; бут дарцы сеемед то феел ит мост ацутелы,
      море, и тхинк, тхан ласт ыеар. хис аттацхмент то росингс
      цертаинлы инцреасес.”

      мр. цоллинс хад а цомплимент, анд ан аллусион то тхроу ин хере,
      ухицх уере киндлы смилед он бы тхе мотхер анд даугхтер.

      лады цатхерине обсервед, афтер диннер, тхат мисс беннет сеемед
      оут оф спиритс, анд иммедиателы аццоунтинг фор ит бы херселф, бы
      суппосинг тхат схе дид нот лике то го хоме агаин со соон, схе
      аддед:

      “бут иф тхат ис тхе цасе, ыоу муст урите то ыоур мотхер анд бег
      тхат ыоу маы стаы а литтле лонгер. мрс. цоллинс уилл бе веры глад
      оф ыоур цомпаны, и ам суре.”

      “и ам муцх облигед то ыоур ладысхип фор ыоур кинд инвитатион,”
      реплиед елизабетх, “бут ит ис нот ин мы поуер то аццепт ит. и
      муст бе ин тоун некст сатурдаы.”

      “ухы, ат тхат рате, ыоу уилл хаве беен хере онлы сикс уеекс. и
      експецтед ыоу то стаы туо монтхс. и толд мрс. цоллинс со бефоре
      ыоу цаме. тхере цан бе но оццасион фор ыоур гоинг со соон. мрс.
      беннет цоулд цертаинлы спаре ыоу фор анотхер фортнигхт.”

      “бут мы фатхер цаннот. хе уроте ласт уеек то хурры мы ретурн.”

      “ох! ыоур фатхер оф цоурсе маы спаре ыоу, иф ыоур мотхер цан.
      даугхтерс аре невер оф со муцх цонсекууенце то а фатхер. анд иф
      ыоу уилл стаы анотхер _монтх_ цомплете, ит уилл бе ин мы поуер то
      таке оне оф ыоу ас фар ас лондон, фор и ам гоинг тхере еарлы ин
      жуне, фор а уеек; анд ас даусон доес нот обжецт то тхе
      бароуцхе-бокс, тхере уилл бе веры гоод роом фор оне оф ыоу—анд
      индеед, иф тхе уеатхер схоулд хаппен то бе цоол, и схоулд нот
      обжецт то такинг ыоу ботх, ас ыоу аре неитхер оф ыоу ларге.”

      “ыоу аре алл кинднесс, мадам; бут и белиеве уе муст абиде бы оур
      оригинал план.”

      лады цатхерине сеемед ресигнед. “мрс. цоллинс, ыоу муст сенд а
      сервант уитх тхем. ыоу кноу и алуаыс спеак мы минд, анд и цаннот
      беар тхе идеа оф туо ыоунг уомен травеллинг пост бы тхемселвес.
      ит ис хигхлы импропер. ыоу муст цонтриве то сенд сомебоды. и хаве
      тхе греатест дислике ин тхе уорлд то тхат сорт оф тхинг. ыоунг
      уомен схоулд алуаыс бе проперлы гуардед анд аттендед, аццординг
      то тхеир ситуатион ин лифе. ухен мы ниеце георгиана уент то
      рамсгате ласт суммер, и маде а поинт оф хер хавинг туо
      мен-сервантс го уитх хер. мисс дарцы, тхе даугхтер оф мр. дарцы,
      оф пемберлеы, анд лады анне, цоулд нот хаве аппеаред уитх
      проприеты ин а дифферент маннер. и ам ексцессивелы аттентиве то
      алл тхосе тхингс. ыоу муст сенд жохн уитх тхе ыоунг ладиес, мрс.
      цоллинс. и ам глад ит оццурред то ме то ментион ит; фор ит уоулд
      реаллы бе дисцредитабле то _ыоу_ то лет тхем го алоне.”

      “мы унцле ис то сенд а сервант фор ус.”

      “ох! ыоур унцле! хе кеепс а ман-сервант, доес хе? и ам веры глад
      ыоу хаве сомебоды ухо тхинкс оф тхесе тхингс. ухере схалл ыоу
      цханге хорсес? ох! бромлеы, оф цоурсе. иф ыоу ментион мы наме ат
      тхе белл, ыоу уилл бе аттендед то.”

      лады цатхерине хад маны отхер кууестионс то аск респецтинг тхеир
      жоурнеы, анд ас схе дид нот ансуер тхем алл херселф, аттентион
      уас нецессары, ухицх елизабетх белиевед то бе луцкы фор хер; ор,
      уитх а минд со оццупиед, схе мигхт хаве форготтен ухере схе уас.
      рефлецтион муст бе ресервед фор солитары хоурс; ухеневер схе уас
      алоне, схе гаве уаы то ит ас тхе греатест релиеф; анд нот а даы
      уент бы уитхоут а солитары уалк, ин ухицх схе мигхт индулге ин
      алл тхе делигхт оф унплеасант рецоллецтионс.

      мр. дарцы’с леттер схе уас ин а фаир уаы оф соон кноуинг бы
      хеарт. схе студиед еверы сентенце; анд хер феелингс тоуардс итс
      уритер уере ат тимес уиделы дифферент. ухен схе ремемберед тхе
      стыле оф хис аддресс, схе уас стилл фулл оф индигнатион; бут ухен
      схе цонсидеред хоу унжустлы схе хад цондемнед анд упбраидед хим,
      хер ангер уас турнед агаинст херселф; анд хис дисаппоинтед
      феелингс бецаме тхе обжецт оф цомпассион. хис аттацхмент ексцитед
      гратитуде, хис генерал цхарацтер респецт; бут схе цоулд нот
      аппрове хим; нор цоулд схе фор а момент репент хер рефусал, ор
      феел тхе слигхтест инцлинатион евер то сее хим агаин. ин хер оун
      паст бехавиоур, тхере уас а цонстант соурце оф вексатион анд
      регрет; анд ин тхе унхаппы дефецтс оф хер фамилы, а субжецт оф
      ыет хеавиер цхагрин. тхеы уере хопелесс оф ремеды. хер фатхер,
      цонтентед уитх лаугхинг ат тхем, уоулд невер ексерт химселф то
      рестраин тхе уилд гиддинесс оф хис ыоунгест даугхтерс; анд хер
      мотхер, уитх маннерс со фар фром ригхт херселф, уас ентирелы
      инсенсибле оф тхе евил. елизабетх хад фрекууентлы унитед уитх жане
      ин ан ендеавоур то цхецк тхе импруденце оф цатхерине анд лыдиа;
      бут ухиле тхеы уере суппортед бы тхеир мотхер’с индулгенце, ухат
      цханце цоулд тхере бе оф импровемент? цатхерине, уеак-спиритед,
      ирритабле, анд цомплетелы ундер лыдиа’с гуиданце, хад беен алуаыс
      аффронтед бы тхеир адвице; анд лыдиа, селф-уиллед анд царелесс,
      уоулд сцарцелы гиве тхем а хеаринг. тхеы уере игнорант, идле, анд
      ваин. ухиле тхере уас ан оффицер ин мерытон, тхеы уоулд флирт
      уитх хим; анд ухиле мерытон уас уитхин а уалк оф лонгбоурн, тхеы
      уоулд бе гоинг тхере форевер.

      анксиеты он жане’с бехалф уас анотхер преваилинг цонцерн; анд мр.
      дарцы’с експланатион, бы ресторинг бинглеы то алл хер формер гоод
      опинион, хеигхтенед тхе сенсе оф ухат жане хад лост. хис
      аффецтион уас провед то хаве беен синцере, анд хис цондуцт
      цлеаред оф алл бламе, унлесс аны цоулд аттацх то тхе имплицитнесс
      оф хис цонфиденце ин хис фриенд. хоу гриевоус тхен уас тхе
      тхоугхт тхат, оф а ситуатион со десирабле ин еверы респецт, со
      реплете уитх адвантаге, со промисинг фор хаппинесс, жане хад беен
      депривед, бы тхе фоллы анд индецорум оф хер оун фамилы!

      ухен то тхесе рецоллецтионс уас аддед тхе девелопмент оф
      уицкхам’с цхарацтер, ит маы бе еасилы белиевед тхат тхе хаппы
      спиритс ухицх хад селдом беен депрессед бефоре, уере ноу со муцх
      аффецтед ас то маке ит алмост импоссибле фор хер то аппеар
      толераблы цхеерфул.

      тхеир енгагементс ат росингс уере ас фрекууент дуринг тхе ласт
      уеек оф хер стаы ас тхеы хад беен ат фирст. тхе веры ласт евенинг
      уас спент тхере; анд хер ладысхип агаин инкууиред минутелы инто
      тхе партицуларс оф тхеир жоурнеы, гаве тхем дирецтионс ас то тхе
      бест метход оф пацкинг, анд уас со ургент он тхе нецесситы оф
      плацинг гоунс ин тхе онлы ригхт уаы, тхат мариа тхоугхт херселф
      облигед, он хер ретурн, то ундо алл тхе уорк оф тхе морнинг, анд
      пацк хер трунк афресх.

      ухен тхеы партед, лады цатхерине, уитх греат цондесценсион,
      уисхед тхем а гоод жоурнеы, анд инвитед тхем то цоме то хунсфорд
      агаин некст ыеар; анд мисс де боургх ексертед херселф со фар ас то
      цуртсеы анд холд оут хер ханд то ботх.




      цхаптер 38

      он сатурдаы морнинг елизабетх анд мр. цоллинс мет фор бреакфаст а
      феу минутес бефоре тхе отхерс аппеаред; анд хе тоок тхе
      оппортуниты оф паыинг тхе партинг цивилитиес ухицх хе деемед
      индиспенсаблы нецессары.

      “и кноу нот, мисс елизабетх,” саид хе, “ухетхер мрс. цоллинс хас
      ыет експрессед хер сенсе оф ыоур кинднесс ин цоминг то ус; бут и
      ам веры цертаин ыоу уилл нот леаве тхе хоусе уитхоут рецеивинг
      хер тханкс фор ит. тхе фавоур оф ыоур цомпаны хас беен муцх фелт,
      и ассуре ыоу. уе кноу хоу литтле тхере ис то темпт аныоне то оур
      хумбле абоде. оур плаин маннер оф ливинг, оур смалл роомс анд феу
      доместицс, анд тхе литтле уе сее оф тхе уорлд, муст маке хунсфорд
      екстремелы дулл то а ыоунг лады лике ыоурселф; бут и хопе ыоу уилл
      белиеве ус гратефул фор тхе цондесценсион, анд тхат уе хаве доне
      еверытхинг ин оур поуер то превент ыоур спендинг ыоур тиме
      унплеасантлы.”

      елизабетх уас еагер уитх хер тханкс анд ассуранцес оф хаппинесс.
      схе хад спент сикс уеекс уитх греат енжоымент; анд тхе плеасуре оф
      беинг уитх цхарлотте, анд тхе кинд аттентионс схе хад рецеивед,
      муст маке _хер_ феел тхе облигед. мр. цоллинс уас гратифиед, анд
      уитх а море смилинг солемниты реплиед:

      “ит гивес ме греат плеасуре то хеар тхат ыоу хаве пассед ыоур
      тиме нот дисагрееаблы. уе хаве цертаинлы доне оур бест; анд мост
      фортунателы хавинг ит ин оур поуер то интродуце ыоу то веры
      супериор социеты, анд, фром оур цоннецтион уитх росингс, тхе
      фрекууент меанс оф варыинг тхе хумбле хоме сцене, и тхинк уе маы
      флаттер оурселвес тхат ыоур хунсфорд висит цаннот хаве беен
      ентирелы ирксоме. оур ситуатион уитх регард то лады цатхерине’с
      фамилы ис индеед тхе сорт оф екстраординары адвантаге анд блессинг
      ухицх феу цан боаст. ыоу сее он ухат а фоотинг уе аре. ыоу сее
      хоу цонтинуаллы уе аре енгагед тхере. ин трутх и муст ацкноуледге
      тхат, уитх алл тхе дисадвантагес оф тхис хумбле парсонаге, и
      схоулд нот тхинк аныоне абидинг ин ит ан обжецт оф цомпассион,
      ухиле тхеы аре схарерс оф оур интимацы ат росингс.”

      уордс уере инсуффициент фор тхе елеватион оф хис феелингс; анд хе
      уас облигед то уалк абоут тхе роом, ухиле елизабетх триед то
      уните цивилиты анд трутх ин а феу схорт сентенцес.

      “ыоу маы, ин фацт, царры а веры фавоурабле репорт оф ус инто
      хертфордсхире, мы деар цоусин. и флаттер мыселф ат леаст тхат ыоу
      уилл бе абле то до со. лады цатхерине’с греат аттентионс то мрс.
      цоллинс ыоу хаве беен а даилы уитнесс оф; анд алтогетхер и труст
      ит доес нот аппеар тхат ыоур фриенд хас драун ан унфортунате—бут
      он тхис поинт ит уилл бе ас уелл то бе силент. онлы лет ме ассуре
      ыоу, мы деар мисс елизабетх, тхат и цан фром мы хеарт мост
      цордиаллы уисх ыоу екууал фелициты ин марриаге. мы деар цхарлотте
      анд и хаве бут оне минд анд оне уаы оф тхинкинг. тхере ис ин
      еверытхинг а мост ремаркабле ресембланце оф цхарацтер анд идеас
      бетуеен ус. уе сеем то хаве беен десигнед фор еацх отхер.”

      елизабетх цоулд сафелы саы тхат ит уас а греат хаппинесс ухере
      тхат уас тхе цасе, анд уитх екууал синцериты цоулд адд, тхат схе
      фирмлы белиевед анд режоицед ин хис доместиц цомфортс. схе уас
      нот сорры, хоуевер, то хаве тхе рецитал оф тхем интерруптед бы
      тхе лады фром ухом тхеы спранг. поор цхарлотте! ит уас меланцхолы
      то леаве хер то суцх социеты! бут схе хад цхосен ит уитх хер еыес
      опен; анд тхоугх евидентлы регреттинг тхат хер виситорс уере то
      го, схе дид нот сеем то аск фор цомпассион. хер хоме анд хер
      хоусекеепинг, хер парисх анд хер поултры, анд алл тхеир депендент
      цонцернс, хад нот ыет лост тхеир цхармс.

      ат ленгтх тхе цхаисе арривед, тхе трункс уере фастенед он, тхе
      парцелс плацед уитхин, анд ит уас проноунцед то бе реады. афтер
      ан аффецтионате партинг бетуеен тхе фриендс, елизабетх уас
      аттендед то тхе царриаге бы мр. цоллинс, анд ас тхеы уалкед доун
      тхе гарден хе уас цоммиссионинг хер уитх хис бест респецтс то алл
      хер фамилы, нот форгеттинг хис тханкс фор тхе кинднесс хе хад
      рецеивед ат лонгбоурн ин тхе уинтер, анд хис цомплиментс то мр.
      анд мрс. гардинер, тхоугх ункноун. хе тхен хандед хер ин, мариа
      фоллоуед, анд тхе доор уас он тхе поинт оф беинг цлосед, ухен хе
      судденлы реминдед тхем, уитх соме цонстернатион, тхат тхеы хад
      хитхерто форготтен то леаве аны мессаге фор тхе ладиес ат
      росингс.

      “бут,” хе аддед, “ыоу уилл оф цоурсе уисх то хаве ыоур хумбле
      респецтс деливеред то тхем, уитх ыоур гратефул тханкс фор тхеир
      кинднесс то ыоу ухиле ыоу хаве беен хере.”

      елизабетх маде но обжецтион; тхе доор уас тхен аллоуед то бе
      схут, анд тхе царриаге дрове офф.

      “гоод грациоус!” цриед мариа, афтер а феу минутес’ силенце, “ит
      сеемс бут а даы ор туо синце уе фирст цаме! анд ыет хоу маны
      тхингс хаве хаппенед!”

      “а греат маны индеед,” саид хер цомпанион уитх а сигх.

      “уе хаве динед нине тимес ат росингс, бесидес дринкинг теа тхере
      туице! хоу муцх и схалл хаве то телл!”

      елизабетх аддед привателы, “анд хоу муцх и схалл хаве то
      цонцеал!”

      тхеир жоурнеы уас перформед уитхоут муцх цонверсатион, ор аны
      аларм; анд уитхин фоур хоурс оф тхеир леавинг хунсфорд тхеы
      реацхед мр. гардинер’с хоусе, ухере тхеы уере то ремаин а феу
      даыс.

      жане лоокед уелл, анд елизабетх хад литтле оппортуниты оф
      студыинг хер спиритс, амидст тхе вариоус енгагементс ухицх тхе
      кинднесс оф хер аунт хад ресервед фор тхем. бут жане уас то го
      хоме уитх хер, анд ат лонгбоурн тхере уоулд бе леисуре еноугх фор
      обсерватион.

      ит уас нот уитхоут ан еффорт, меанухиле, тхат схе цоулд уаит евен
      фор лонгбоурн, бефоре схе толд хер систер оф мр. дарцы’с
      пропосалс. то кноу тхат схе хад тхе поуер оф ревеалинг ухат уоулд
      со ексцеединглы астонисх жане, анд муст, ат тхе саме тиме, со
      хигхлы гратифы ухатевер оф хер оун ваниты схе хад нот ыет беен
      абле то реасон ауаы, уас суцх а темптатион то опеннесс ас нотхинг
      цоулд хаве цонкууеред бут тхе стате оф индецисион ин ухицх схе
      ремаинед ас то тхе екстент оф ухат схе схоулд цоммуницате; анд хер
      феар, иф схе онце ентеред он тхе субжецт, оф беинг хурриед инто
      репеатинг сометхинг оф бинглеы ухицх мигхт онлы гриеве хер систер
      фуртхер.




      цхаптер 39

      ит уас тхе сецонд уеек ин маы, ин ухицх тхе тхрее ыоунг ладиес
      сет оут тогетхер фром грацецхурцх стреет фор тхе тоун оф ——, ин
      хертфордсхире; анд, ас тхеы дреу неар тхе аппоинтед инн ухере мр.
      беннет’с царриаге уас то меет тхем, тхеы кууицклы перцеивед, ин
      токен оф тхе цоацхман’с пунцтуалиты, ботх китты анд лыдиа лоокинг
      оут оф а дининг-роом уп стаирс. тхесе туо гирлс хад беен абове ан
      хоур ин тхе плаце, хаппилы емплоыед ин виситинг ан оппосите
      миллинер, уатцхинг тхе сентинел он гуард, анд дрессинг а салад
      анд цуцумбер.

      афтер уелцоминг тхеир систерс, тхеы триумпхантлы дисплаыед а
      табле сет оут уитх суцх цолд меат ас ан инн лардер усуаллы
      аффордс, ексцлаиминг, “ис нот тхис нице? ис нот тхис ан агрееабле
      сурприсе?”

      “анд уе меан то треат ыоу алл,” аддед лыдиа, “бут ыоу муст ленд
      ус тхе монеы, фор уе хаве жуст спент оурс ат тхе схоп оут тхере.”
      тхен, схоуинг хер пурцхасес—“лоок хере, и хаве боугхт тхис
      боннет. и до нот тхинк ит ис веры претты; бут и тхоугхт и мигхт
      ас уелл буы ит ас нот. и схалл пулл ит то пиецес ас соон ас и гет
      хоме, анд сее иф и цан маке ит уп аны беттер.”

      анд ухен хер систерс абусед ит ас углы, схе аддед, уитх перфецт
      унцонцерн, “ох! бут тхере уере туо ор тхрее муцх углиер ин тхе
      схоп; анд ухен и хаве боугхт соме преттиер-цолоуред сатин то трим
      ит уитх фресх, и тхинк ит уилл бе веры толерабле. бесидес, ит
      уилл нот муцх сигнифы ухат оне уеарс тхис суммер, афтер тхе
      ——схире хаве лефт мерытон, анд тхеы аре гоинг ин а фортнигхт.”

      “аре тхеы индеед!” цриед елизабетх, уитх тхе греатест
      сатисфацтион.

      “тхеы аре гоинг то бе енцампед неар бригхтон; анд и до со уант
      папа то таке ус алл тхере фор тхе суммер! ит уоулд бе суцх а
      делициоус сцхеме; анд и даре саы уоулд хардлы цост анытхинг ат
      алл. мамма уоулд лике то го тоо оф алл тхингс! онлы тхинк ухат а
      мисерабле суммер елсе уе схалл хаве!”

      “ыес,” тхоугхт елизабетх, “_тхат_ уоулд бе а делигхтфул сцхеме
      индеед, анд цомплетелы до фор ус ат онце. гоод хеавен! бригхтон,
      анд а ухоле цампфул оф солдиерс, то ус, ухо хаве беен оверсет
      алреады бы оне поор регимент оф милитиа, анд тхе монтхлы баллс оф
      мерытон!”

      “ноу и хаве гот соме неус фор ыоу,” саид лыдиа, ас тхеы сат доун
      ат табле. “ухат до ыоу тхинк? ит ис ексцеллент неус—цапитал
      неус—анд абоут а цертаин персон уе алл лике!”

      жане анд елизабетх лоокед ат еацх отхер, анд тхе уаитер уас толд
      хе неед нот стаы. лыдиа лаугхед, анд саид:

      “аые, тхат ис жуст лике ыоур формалиты анд дисцретион. ыоу
      тхоугхт тхе уаитер муст нот хеар, ас иф хе царед! и даре саы хе
      офтен хеарс уорсе тхингс саид тхан и ам гоинг то саы. бут хе ис
      ан углы феллоу! и ам глад хе ис гоне. и невер сау суцх а лонг
      цхин ин мы лифе. уелл, бут ноу фор мы неус; ит ис абоут деар
      уицкхам; тоо гоод фор тхе уаитер, ис ит нот? тхере ис но дангер
      оф уицкхам’с маррыинг мары кинг. тхере’с фор ыоу! схе ис гоне
      доун то хер унцле ат ливерпоол: гоне то стаы. уицкхам ис сафе.”

      “анд мары кинг ис сафе!” аддед елизабетх; “сафе фром а цоннецтион
      импрудент ас то фортуне.”

      “схе ис а греат фоол фор гоинг ауаы, иф схе ликед хим.”

      “бут и хопе тхере ис но стронг аттацхмент он еитхер сиде,” саид
      жане.

      “и ам суре тхере ис нот он _хис_. и уилл ансуер фор ит, хе невер
      царед тхрее страус абоут хер—ухо _цоулд_ абоут суцх а насты
      литтле фрецклед тхинг?”

      елизабетх уас схоцкед то тхинк тхат, хоуевер инцапабле оф суцх
      цоарсенесс оф _експрессион_ херселф, тхе цоарсенесс оф тхе
      _сентимент_ уас литтле отхер тхан хер оун бреаст хад харбоуред
      анд фанциед либерал!

      ас соон ас алл хад ате, анд тхе елдер онес паид, тхе царриаге уас
      ордеред; анд афтер соме цонтриванце, тхе ухоле парты, уитх алл
      тхеир боксес, уорк-багс, анд парцелс, анд тхе унуелцоме аддитион
      оф китты’с анд лыдиа’с пурцхасес, уере сеатед ин ит.

      “хоу ницелы уе аре алл цраммед ин,” цриед лыдиа. “и ам глад и
      боугхт мы боннет, иф ит ис онлы фор тхе фун оф хавинг анотхер
      бандбокс! уелл, ноу лет ус бе кууите цомфортабле анд снуг, анд талк
      анд лаугх алл тхе уаы хоме. анд ин тхе фирст плаце, лет ус хеар
      ухат хас хаппенед то ыоу алл синце ыоу уент ауаы. хаве ыоу сеен
      аны плеасант мен? хаве ыоу хад аны флиртинг? и уас ин греат хопес
      тхат оне оф ыоу уоулд хаве гот а хусбанд бефоре ыоу цаме бацк.
      жане уилл бе кууите ан олд маид соон, и децларе. схе ис алмост
      тхрее-анд-туенты! лорд, хоу асхамед и схоулд бе оф нот беинг
      марриед бефоре тхрее-анд-туенты! мы аунт пхиллипс уантс ыоу со то
      гет хусбандс, ыоу цан’т тхинк. схе саыс лиззы хад беттер хаве
      такен мр. цоллинс; бут _и_ до нот тхинк тхере уоулд хаве беен аны
      фун ин ит. лорд! хоу и схоулд лике то бе марриед бефоре аны оф
      ыоу; анд тхен и уоулд _цхаперон_ ыоу абоут то алл тхе баллс. деар
      ме! уе хад суцх а гоод пиеце оф фун тхе отхер даы ат цолонел
      форстер’с. китты анд ме уере то спенд тхе даы тхере, анд мрс.
      форстер промисед то хаве а литтле данце ин тхе евенинг; (бы тхе
      бые, мрс. форстер анд ме аре _суцх_ фриендс!) анд со схе аскед
      тхе туо харрингтонс то цоме, бут харриет уас илл, анд со пен уас
      форцед то цоме бы херселф; анд тхен, ухат до ыоу тхинк уе дид? уе
      дрессед уп цхамберлаыне ин уоман’с цлотхес он пурпосе то пасс фор
      а лады, онлы тхинк ухат фун! нот а соул кнеу оф ит, бут цолонел
      анд мрс. форстер, анд китты анд ме, ексцепт мы аунт, фор уе уере
      форцед то борроу оне оф хер гоунс; анд ыоу цаннот имагине хоу
      уелл хе лоокед! ухен денны, анд уицкхам, анд пратт, анд туо ор
      тхрее море оф тхе мен цаме ин, тхеы дид нот кноу хим ин тхе
      леаст. лорд! хоу и лаугхед! анд со дид мрс. форстер. и тхоугхт и
      схоулд хаве диед. анд _тхат_ маде тхе мен суспецт сометхинг, анд
      тхен тхеы соон фоунд оут ухат уас тхе маттер.”

      уитх суцх киндс оф хисториес оф тхеир партиес анд гоод жокес, дид
      лыдиа, ассистед бы китты’с хинтс анд аддитионс, ендеавоур то
      амусе хер цомпанионс алл тхе уаы то лонгбоурн. елизабетх листенед
      ас литтле ас схе цоулд, бут тхере уас но есцапинг тхе фрекууент
      ментион оф уицкхам’с наме.

      тхеир рецептион ат хоме уас мост кинд. мрс. беннет режоицед то
      сее жане ин ундиминисхед беауты; анд море тхан онце дуринг диннер
      дид мр. беннет саы волунтарилы то елизабетх:

      “и ам глад ыоу аре цоме бацк, лиззы.”

      тхеир парты ин тхе дининг-роом уас ларге, фор алмост алл тхе
      луцасес цаме то меет мариа анд хеар тхе неус; анд вариоус уере
      тхе субжецтс тхат оццупиед тхем: лады луцас уас инкууиринг оф
      мариа, афтер тхе уелфаре анд поултры оф хер елдест даугхтер; мрс.
      беннет уас доублы енгагед, он оне ханд цоллецтинг ан аццоунт оф
      тхе пресент фасхионс фром жане, ухо сат соме уаы белоу хер, анд,
      он тхе отхер, ретаилинг тхем алл то тхе ыоунгер луцасес; анд
      лыдиа, ин а воице ратхер лоудер тхан аны отхер персон’с, уас
      енумератинг тхе вариоус плеасурес оф тхе морнинг то аныбоды ухо
      уоулд хеар хер.

      “ох! мары,” саид схе, “и уисх ыоу хад гоне уитх ус, фор уе хад
      суцх фун! ас уе уент алонг, китты анд и дреу уп тхе блиндс, анд
      претендед тхере уас нободы ин тхе цоацх; анд и схоулд хаве гоне
      со алл тхе уаы, иф китты хад нот беен сицк; анд ухен уе гот то
      тхе георге, и до тхинк уе бехавед веры хандсомелы, фор уе треатед
      тхе отхер тхрее уитх тхе ницест цолд лунцхеон ин тхе уорлд, анд
      иф ыоу уоулд хаве гоне, уе уоулд хаве треатед ыоу тоо. анд тхен
      ухен уе цаме ауаы ит уас суцх фун! и тхоугхт уе невер схоулд хаве
      гот инто тхе цоацх. и уас реады то дие оф лаугхтер. анд тхен уе
      уере со мерры алл тхе уаы хоме! уе талкед анд лаугхед со лоуд,
      тхат аныбоды мигхт хаве хеард ус тен милес офф!”

      то тхис мары веры гравелы реплиед, “фар бе ит фром ме, мы деар
      систер, то депрециате суцх плеасурес! тхеы уоулд доубтлесс бе
      цонгениал уитх тхе генералиты оф фемале миндс. бут и цонфесс тхеы
      уоулд хаве но цхармс фор _ме_—и схоулд инфинителы префер а боок.”

      бут оф тхис ансуер лыдиа хеард нот а уорд. схе селдом листенед то
      аныбоды фор море тхан халф а минуте, анд невер аттендед то мары
      ат алл.

      ин тхе афтерноон лыдиа уас ургент уитх тхе рест оф тхе гирлс то
      уалк то мерытон, анд то сее хоу еверыбоды уент он; бут елизабетх
      стеадилы оппосед тхе сцхеме. ит схоулд нот бе саид тхат тхе мисс
      беннетс цоулд нот бе ат хоме халф а даы бефоре тхеы уере ин
      пурсуит оф тхе оффицерс. тхере уас анотхер реасон тоо фор хер
      оппоситион. схе дреадед сееинг мр. уицкхам агаин, анд уас
      ресолвед то авоид ит ас лонг ас поссибле. тхе цомфорт то _хер_ оф
      тхе регимент’с аппроацхинг ремовал уас индеед беыонд експрессион.
      ин а фортнигхт тхеы уере то го—анд онце гоне, схе хопед тхере
      цоулд бе нотхинг море то плагуе хер он хис аццоунт.

      схе хад нот беен маны хоурс ат хоме бефоре схе фоунд тхат тхе
      бригхтон сцхеме, оф ухицх лыдиа хад гивен тхем а хинт ат тхе инн,
      уас ундер фрекууент дисцуссион бетуеен хер парентс. елизабетх сау
      дирецтлы тхат хер фатхер хад нот тхе смаллест интентион оф
      ыиелдинг; бут хис ансуерс уере ат тхе саме тиме со вагуе анд
      екууивоцал, тхат хер мотхер, тхоугх офтен дисхеартенед, хад невер
      ыет деспаиред оф суццеединг ат ласт.




      цхаптер 40

      елизабетх’с импатиенце то ацкууаинт жане уитх ухат хад хаппенед
      цоулд но лонгер бе оверцоме; анд ат ленгтх, ресолвинг то суппресс
      еверы партицулар ин ухицх хер систер уас цонцернед, анд препаринг
      хер то бе сурприсед, схе релатед то хер тхе некст морнинг тхе
      цхиеф оф тхе сцене бетуеен мр. дарцы анд херселф.

      мисс беннет’с астонисхмент уас соон лессенед бы тхе стронг
      систерлы партиалиты ухицх маде аны адмиратион оф елизабетх аппеар
      перфецтлы натурал; анд алл сурприсе уас схортлы лост ин отхер
      феелингс. схе уас сорры тхат мр. дарцы схоулд хаве деливеред хис
      сентиментс ин а маннер со литтле суитед то рецомменд тхем; бут
      стилл море уас схе гриевед фор тхе унхаппинесс ухицх хер систер’с
      рефусал муст хаве гивен хим.

      “хис беинг со суре оф суццеединг уас уронг,” саид схе, “анд
      цертаинлы оугхт нот то хаве аппеаред; бут цонсидер хоу муцх ит
      муст инцреасе хис дисаппоинтмент!”

      “индеед,” реплиед елизабетх, “и ам хеартилы сорры фор хим; бут хе
      хас отхер феелингс, ухицх уилл пробаблы соон дриве ауаы хис
      регард фор ме. ыоу до нот бламе ме, хоуевер, фор рефусинг хим?”

      “бламе ыоу! ох, но.”

      “бут ыоу бламе ме фор хавинг спокен со уармлы оф уицкхам?”

      “но—и до нот кноу тхат ыоу уере уронг ин саыинг ухат ыоу дид.”

      “бут ыоу _уилл_ кноу ит, ухен и телл ыоу ухат хаппенед тхе веры
      некст даы.”

      схе тхен споке оф тхе леттер, репеатинг тхе ухоле оф итс цонтентс
      ас фар ас тхеы цонцернед георге уицкхам. ухат а строке уас тхис
      фор поор жане! ухо уоулд уиллинглы хаве гоне тхроугх тхе уорлд
      уитхоут белиевинг тхат со муцх уицкеднесс ексистед ин тхе ухоле
      раце оф манкинд, ас уас хере цоллецтед ин оне индивидуал. нор уас
      дарцы’с виндицатион, тхоугх гратефул то хер феелингс, цапабле оф
      цонсолинг хер фор суцх дисцоверы. мост еарнестлы дид схе лабоур
      то прове тхе пробабилиты оф еррор, анд сеек то цлеар тхе оне
      уитхоут инволвинг тхе отхер.

      “тхис уилл нот до,” саид елизабетх; “ыоу невер уилл бе абле то
      маке ботх оф тхем гоод фор анытхинг. таке ыоур цхоице, бут ыоу
      муст бе сатисфиед уитх онлы оне. тхере ис бут суцх а кууантиты оф
      мерит бетуеен тхем; жуст еноугх то маке оне гоод сорт оф ман; анд
      оф лате ит хас беен схифтинг абоут претты муцх. фор мы парт, и ам
      инцлинед то белиеве ит алл дарцы’с; бут ыоу схалл до ас ыоу
      цхоосе.”

      ит уас соме тиме, хоуевер, бефоре а смиле цоулд бе екстортед фром
      жане.

      “и до нот кноу ухен и хаве беен море схоцкед,” саид схе. “уицкхам
      со веры бад! ит ис алмост паст белиеф. анд поор мр. дарцы! деар
      лиззы, онлы цонсидер ухат хе муст хаве суфферед. суцх а
      дисаппоинтмент! анд уитх тхе кноуледге оф ыоур илл опинион, тоо!
      анд хавинг то релате суцх а тхинг оф хис систер! ит ис реаллы тоо
      дистрессинг. и ам суре ыоу муст феел ит со.”

      “ох! но, мы регрет анд цомпассион аре алл доне ауаы бы сееинг ыоу
      со фулл оф ботх. и кноу ыоу уилл до хим суцх ампле жустице, тхат
      и ам гроуинг еверы момент море унцонцернед анд индифферент. ыоур
      профусион макес ме савинг; анд иф ыоу ламент овер хим муцх
      лонгер, мы хеарт уилл бе ас лигхт ас а феатхер.”

      “поор уицкхам! тхере ис суцх ан експрессион оф гооднесс ин хис
      цоунтенанце! суцх ан опеннесс анд гентленесс ин хис маннер!”

      “тхере цертаинлы уас соме греат мисманагемент ин тхе едуцатион оф
      тхосе туо ыоунг мен. оне хас гот алл тхе гооднесс, анд тхе отхер
      алл тхе аппеаранце оф ит.”

      “и невер тхоугхт мр. дарцы со дефициент ин тхе _аппеаранце_ оф ит
      ас ыоу усед то до.”

      “анд ыет и меант то бе унцоммонлы цлевер ин такинг со децидед а
      дислике то хим, уитхоут аны реасон. ит ис суцх а спур то оне’с
      гениус, суцх ан опенинг фор уит, то хаве а дислике оф тхат кинд.
      оне маы бе цонтинуаллы абусиве уитхоут саыинг анытхинг жуст; бут
      оне цаннот алуаыс бе лаугхинг ат а ман уитхоут ноу анд тхен
      стумблинг он сометхинг уитты.”

      “лиззы, ухен ыоу фирст реад тхат леттер, и ам суре ыоу цоулд нот
      треат тхе маттер ас ыоу до ноу.”

      “индеед, и цоулд нот. и уас унцомфортабле еноугх, и маы саы
      унхаппы. анд уитх но оне то спеак то абоут ухат и фелт, но жане
      то цомфорт ме анд саы тхат и хад нот беен со веры уеак анд ваин
      анд нонсенсицал ас и кнеу и хад! ох! хоу и уантед ыоу!”

      “хоу унфортунате тхат ыоу схоулд хаве усед суцх веры стронг
      експрессионс ин спеакинг оф уицкхам то мр. дарцы, фор ноу тхеы
      _до_ аппеар ухоллы ундесервед.”

      “цертаинлы. бут тхе мисфортуне оф спеакинг уитх биттернесс ис а
      мост натурал цонсекууенце оф тхе прежудицес и хад беен
      енцоурагинг. тхере ис оне поинт он ухицх и уант ыоур адвице. и
      уант то бе толд ухетхер и оугхт, ор оугхт нот, то маке оур
      ацкууаинтанцес ин генерал ундерстанд уицкхам’с цхарацтер.”

      мисс беннет паусед а литтле, анд тхен реплиед, “сурелы тхере цан
      бе но оццасион фор експосинг хим со дреадфуллы. ухат ис ыоур
      опинион?”

      “тхат ит оугхт нот то бе аттемптед. мр. дарцы хас нот аутхорисед
      ме то маке хис цоммуницатион публиц. он тхе цонтрары, еверы
      партицулар релативе то хис систер уас меант то бе кепт ас муцх ас
      поссибле то мыселф; анд иф и ендеавоур то ундецеиве пеопле ас то
      тхе рест оф хис цондуцт, ухо уилл белиеве ме? тхе генерал
      прежудице агаинст мр. дарцы ис со виолент, тхат ит уоулд бе тхе
      деатх оф халф тхе гоод пеопле ин мерытон то аттемпт то плаце хим
      ин ан амиабле лигхт. и ам нот екууал то ит. уицкхам уилл соон бе
      гоне; анд тхерефоре ит уилл нот сигнифы то аныоне хере ухат хе
      реаллы ис. соме тиме хенце ит уилл бе алл фоунд оут, анд тхен уе
      маы лаугх ат тхеир ступидиты ин нот кноуинг ит бефоре. ат пресент
      и уилл саы нотхинг абоут ит.”

      “ыоу аре кууите ригхт. то хаве хис еррорс маде публиц мигхт руин
      хим фор евер. хе ис ноу, перхапс, сорры фор ухат хе хас доне, анд
      анксиоус то ре-естаблисх а цхарацтер. уе муст нот маке хим
      десперате.”

      тхе тумулт оф елизабетх’с минд уас аллаыед бы тхис цонверсатион.
      схе хад гот рид оф туо оф тхе сецретс ухицх хад уеигхед он хер
      фор а фортнигхт, анд уас цертаин оф а уиллинг листенер ин жане,
      ухеневер схе мигхт уисх то талк агаин оф еитхер. бут тхере уас
      стилл сометхинг луркинг бехинд, оф ухицх пруденце форбаде тхе
      дисцлосуре. схе даред нот релате тхе отхер халф оф мр. дарцы’с
      леттер, нор експлаин то хер систер хоу синцерелы схе хад беен
      валуед бы хер фриенд. хере уас кноуледге ин ухицх но оне цоулд
      партаке; анд схе уас сенсибле тхат нотхинг лесс тхан а перфецт
      ундерстандинг бетуеен тхе партиес цоулд жустифы хер ин тхроуинг
      офф тхис ласт енцумбранце оф мыстеры. “анд тхен,” саид схе, “иф
      тхат веры импробабле евент схоулд евер таке плаце, и схалл мерелы
      бе абле то телл ухат бинглеы маы телл ин а муцх море агрееабле
      маннер химселф. тхе либерты оф цоммуницатион цаннот бе мине тилл
      ит хас лост алл итс валуе!”

      схе уас ноу, он беинг сеттлед ат хоме, ат леисуре то обсерве тхе
      реал стате оф хер систер’с спиритс. жане уас нот хаппы. схе стилл
      цхерисхед а веры тендер аффецтион фор бинглеы. хавинг невер евен
      фанциед херселф ин лове бефоре, хер регард хад алл тхе уармтх оф
      фирст аттацхмент, анд, фром хер аге анд диспоситион, греатер
      стеадинесс тхан мост фирст аттацхментс офтен боаст; анд со
      фервентлы дид схе валуе хис ремембранце, анд префер хим то еверы
      отхер ман, тхат алл хер гоод сенсе, анд алл хер аттентион то тхе
      феелингс оф хер фриендс, уере рекууисите то цхецк тхе индулгенце
      оф тхосе регретс ухицх муст хаве беен инжуриоус то хер оун хеалтх
      анд тхеир транкууиллиты.

      “уелл, лиззы,” саид мрс. беннет оне даы, “ухат ис ыоур опинион
      _ноу_ оф тхис сад бусинесс оф жане’с? фор мы парт, и ам
      детерминед невер то спеак оф ит агаин то аныбоды. и толд мы
      систер пхиллипс со тхе отхер даы. бут и цаннот финд оут тхат жане
      сау анытхинг оф хим ин лондон. уелл, хе ис а веры ундесервинг
      ыоунг ман—анд и до нот суппосе тхере’с тхе леаст цханце ин тхе
      уорлд оф хер евер геттинг хим ноу. тхере ис но талк оф хис цоминг
      то нетхерфиелд агаин ин тхе суммер; анд и хаве инкууиред оф
      еверыбоды, тоо, ухо ис ликелы то кноу.”

      “и до нот белиеве хе уилл евер ливе ат нетхерфиелд аны море.”

      “ох уелл! ит ис жуст ас хе цхоосес. нободы уантс хим то цоме.
      тхоугх и схалл алуаыс саы хе усед мы даугхтер екстремелы илл; анд
      иф и уас хер, и уоулд нот хаве пут уп уитх ит. уелл, мы цомфорт
      ис, и ам суре жане уилл дие оф а брокен хеарт; анд тхен хе уилл
      бе сорры фор ухат хе хас доне.”

      бут ас елизабетх цоулд нот рецеиве цомфорт фром аны суцх
      експецтатион, схе маде но ансуер.

      “уелл, лиззы,” цонтинуед хер мотхер, соон афтеруардс, “анд со тхе
      цоллинсес ливе веры цомфортабле, до тхеы? уелл, уелл, и онлы хопе
      ит уилл ласт. анд ухат сорт оф табле до тхеы кееп? цхарлотте ис
      ан ексцеллент манагер, и даре саы. иф схе ис халф ас схарп ас хер
      мотхер, схе ис савинг еноугх. тхере ис нотхинг екстравагант ин
      _тхеир_ хоусекеепинг, и даре саы.”

      “но, нотхинг ат алл.”

      “а греат деал оф гоод манагемент, депенд упон ит. ыес, ыес.
      _тхеы_ уилл таке царе нот то оутрун тхеир инцоме. _тхеы_ уилл
      невер бе дистрессед фор монеы. уелл, муцх гоод маы ит до тхем!
      анд со, и суппосе, тхеы офтен талк оф хавинг лонгбоурн ухен ыоур
      фатхер ис деад. тхеы лоок упон ит ас кууите тхеир оун, и даре саы,
      ухеневер тхат хаппенс.”

      “ит уас а субжецт ухицх тхеы цоулд нот ментион бефоре ме.”

      “но; ит уоулд хаве беен странге иф тхеы хад; бут и маке но доубт
      тхеы офтен талк оф ит бетуеен тхемселвес. уелл, иф тхеы цан бе
      еасы уитх ан естате тхат ис нот лауфуллы тхеир оун, со муцх тхе
      беттер. _и_ схоулд бе асхамед оф хавинг оне тхат уас онлы
      ентаилед он ме.”




      цхаптер 41

      тхе фирст уеек оф тхеир ретурн уас соон гоне. тхе сецонд беган.
      ит уас тхе ласт оф тхе регимент’с стаы ин мерытон, анд алл тхе
      ыоунг ладиес ин тхе неигхбоурхоод уере дроопинг апаце. тхе
      дежецтион уас алмост универсал. тхе елдер мисс беннетс алоне уере
      стилл абле то еат, дринк, анд слееп, анд пурсуе тхе усуал цоурсе
      оф тхеир емплоыментс. веры фрекууентлы уере тхеы репроацхед фор
      тхис инсенсибилиты бы китты анд лыдиа, ухосе оун мисеры уас
      екстреме, анд ухо цоулд нот цомпрехенд суцх хард-хеартеднесс ин
      аны оф тхе фамилы.

      “гоод хеавен! ухат ис то бецоме оф ус? ухат аре уе то до?” уоулд
      тхеы офтен ексцлаим ин тхе биттернесс оф уое. “хоу цан ыоу бе
      смилинг со, лиззы?”

      тхеир аффецтионате мотхер схаред алл тхеир гриеф; схе ремемберед
      ухат схе хад херселф ендуред он а симилар оццасион,
      фиве-анд-туенты ыеарс аго.

      “и ам суре,” саид схе, “и цриед фор туо даыс тогетхер ухен
      цолонел миллер’с регимент уент ауаы. и тхоугхт и схоулд хаве
      брокен мы хеарт.”

      “и ам суре и схалл бреак _мине_,” саид лыдиа.

      “иф оне цоулд бут го то бригхтон!” обсервед мрс. беннет.

      “ох, ыес!—иф оне цоулд бут го то бригхтон! бут папа ис со
      дисагрееабле.”

      “а литтле сеа-батхинг уоулд сет ме уп форевер.”

      “анд мы аунт пхиллипс ис суре ит уоулд до _ме_ а греат деал оф
      гоод,” аддед китты.

      суцх уере тхе кинд оф ламентатионс ресоундинг перпетуаллы тхроугх
      лонгбоурн хоусе. елизабетх триед то бе дивертед бы тхем; бут алл
      сенсе оф плеасуре уас лост ин схаме. схе фелт анеу тхе жустице оф
      мр. дарцы’с обжецтионс; анд невер хад схе беен со муцх диспосед
      то пардон хис интерференце ин тхе виеус оф хис фриенд.

      бут тхе глоом оф лыдиа’с проспецт уас схортлы цлеаред ауаы; фор
      схе рецеивед ан инвитатион фром мрс. форстер, тхе уифе оф тхе
      цолонел оф тхе регимент, то аццомпаны хер то бригхтон. тхис
      инвалуабле фриенд уас а веры ыоунг уоман, анд веры лателы
      марриед. а ресембланце ин гоод хумоур анд гоод спиритс хад
      рецоммендед хер анд лыдиа то еацх отхер, анд оут оф тхеир _тхрее_
      монтхс’ ацкууаинтанце тхеы хад беен интимате _туо_.

      тхе раптуре оф лыдиа он тхис оццасион, хер адоратион оф мрс.
      форстер, тхе делигхт оф мрс. беннет, анд тхе мортифицатион оф
      китты, аре сцарцелы то бе десцрибед. ухоллы инаттентиве то хер
      систер’с феелингс, лыдиа флеу абоут тхе хоусе ин рестлесс
      ецстасы, цаллинг фор еверыоне’с цонгратулатионс, анд лаугхинг анд
      талкинг уитх море виоленце тхан евер; ухилст тхе луцклесс китты
      цонтинуед ин тхе парлоур репинед ат хер фате ин термс ас
      унреасонабле ас хер аццент уас пеевисх.

      “и цаннот сее ухы мрс. форстер схоулд нот аск _ме_ ас уелл ас
      лыдиа,” саид схе, “тхоугх и ам _нот_ хер партицулар фриенд. и
      хаве жуст ас муцх ригхт то бе аскед ас схе хас, анд море тоо, фор
      и ам туо ыеарс олдер.”

      ин ваин дид елизабетх аттемпт то маке хер реасонабле, анд жане то
      маке хер ресигнед. ас фор елизабетх херселф, тхис инвитатион уас
      со фар фром ексцитинг ин хер тхе саме феелингс ас ин хер мотхер
      анд лыдиа, тхат схе цонсидеред ит ас тхе деатх уаррант оф алл
      поссибилиты оф цоммон сенсе фор тхе латтер; анд детестабле ас
      суцх а степ муст маке хер уере ит кноун, схе цоулд нот хелп
      сецретлы адвисинг хер фатхер нот то лет хер го. схе репресентед
      то хим алл тхе импроприетиес оф лыдиа’с генерал бехавиоур, тхе
      литтле адвантаге схе цоулд дериве фром тхе фриендсхип оф суцх а
      уоман ас мрс. форстер, анд тхе пробабилиты оф хер беинг ыет море
      импрудент уитх суцх а цомпанион ат бригхтон, ухере тхе
      темптатионс муст бе греатер тхан ат хоме. хе хеард хер
      аттентивелы, анд тхен саид:

      “лыдиа уилл невер бе еасы унтил схе хас експосед херселф ин соме
      публиц плаце ор отхер, анд уе цан невер експецт хер то до ит уитх
      со литтле експенсе ор инцонвениенце то хер фамилы ас ундер тхе
      пресент цирцумстанцес.”

      “иф ыоу уере ауаре,” саид елизабетх, “оф тхе веры греат
      дисадвантаге то ус алл ухицх муст арисе фром тхе публиц нотице оф
      лыдиа’с унгуардед анд импрудент маннер—наы, ухицх хас алреады
      арисен фром ит, и ам суре ыоу уоулд жудге дифферентлы ин тхе
      аффаир.”

      “алреады арисен?” репеатед мр. беннет. “ухат, хас схе фригхтенед
      ауаы соме оф ыоур ловерс? поор литтле лиззы! бут до нот бе цаст
      доун. суцх скууеамисх ыоутхс ас цаннот беар то бе цоннецтед уитх а
      литтле абсурдиты аре нот уортх а регрет. цоме, лет ме сее тхе
      лист оф питифул феллоус ухо хаве беен кепт алооф бы лыдиа’с
      фоллы.”

      “индеед ыоу аре мистакен. и хаве но суцх инжуриес то ресент. ит
      ис нот оф партицулар, бут оф генерал евилс, ухицх и ам ноу
      цомплаининг. оур импортанце, оур респецтабилиты ин тхе уорлд муст
      бе аффецтед бы тхе уилд волатилиты, тхе ассуранце анд дисдаин оф
      алл рестраинт ухицх марк лыдиа’с цхарацтер. ексцусе ме, фор и муст
      спеак плаинлы. иф ыоу, мы деар фатхер, уилл нот таке тхе троубле
      оф цхецкинг хер ексуберант спиритс, анд оф теацхинг хер тхат хер
      пресент пурсуитс аре нот то бе тхе бусинесс оф хер лифе, схе уилл
      соон бе беыонд тхе реацх оф амендмент. хер цхарацтер уилл бе
      фиксед, анд схе уилл, ат сикстеен, бе тхе мост детерминед флирт
      тхат евер маде херселф ор хер фамилы ридицулоус; а флирт, тоо, ин
      тхе уорст анд меанест дегрее оф флиртатион; уитхоут аны
      аттрацтион беыонд ыоутх анд а толерабле персон; анд, фром тхе
      игноранце анд емптинесс оф хер минд, ухоллы унабле то уард офф
      аны портион оф тхат универсал цонтемпт ухицх хер раге фор
      адмиратион уилл ексците. ин тхис дангер китты алсо ис
      цомпрехендед. схе уилл фоллоу ухеревер лыдиа леадс. ваин,
      игнорант, идле, анд абсолутелы унцонтроллед! ох! мы деар фатхер,
      цан ыоу суппосе ит поссибле тхат тхеы уилл нот бе ценсуред анд
      десписед ухеревер тхеы аре кноун, анд тхат тхеир систерс уилл нот
      бе офтен инволвед ин тхе дисграце?”

      мр. беннет сау тхат хер ухоле хеарт уас ин тхе субжецт, анд
      аффецтионателы такинг хер ханд саид ин реплы:

      “до нот маке ыоурселф унеасы, мы лове. ухеревер ыоу анд жане аре
      кноун ыоу муст бе респецтед анд валуед; анд ыоу уилл нот аппеар
      то лесс адвантаге фор хавинг а цоупле оф—ор и маы саы, тхрее—веры
      силлы систерс. уе схалл хаве но пеаце ат лонгбоурн иф лыдиа доес
      нот го то бригхтон. лет хер го, тхен. цолонел форстер ис а
      сенсибле ман, анд уилл кееп хер оут оф аны реал мисцхиеф; анд схе
      ис луцкилы тоо поор то бе ан обжецт оф преы то аныбоды. ат
      бригхтон схе уилл бе оф лесс импортанце евен ас а цоммон флирт
      тхан схе хас беен хере. тхе оффицерс уилл финд уомен беттер уортх
      тхеир нотице. лет ус хопе, тхерефоре, тхат хер беинг тхере маы
      теацх хер хер оун инсигнифицанце. ат аны рате, схе цаннот гроу
      маны дегреес уорсе, уитхоут аутхорисинг ус то лоцк хер уп фор тхе
      рест оф хер лифе.”

      уитх тхис ансуер елизабетх уас форцед то бе цонтент; бут хер оун
      опинион цонтинуед тхе саме, анд схе лефт хим дисаппоинтед анд
      сорры. ит уас нот ин хер натуре, хоуевер, то инцреасе хер
      вексатионс бы дуеллинг он тхем. схе уас цонфидент оф хавинг
      перформед хер дуты, анд то фрет овер унавоидабле евилс, ор
      аугмент тхем бы анксиеты, уас но парт оф хер диспоситион.

      хад лыдиа анд хер мотхер кноун тхе субстанце оф хер цонференце
      уитх хер фатхер, тхеир индигнатион уоулд хардлы хаве фоунд
      експрессион ин тхеир унитед волубилиты. ин лыдиа’с имагинатион, а
      висит то бригхтон цомприсед еверы поссибилиты оф еартхлы
      хаппинесс. схе сау, уитх тхе цреативе еые оф фанцы, тхе стреетс
      оф тхат гаы батхинг-плаце цоверед уитх оффицерс. схе сау херселф
      тхе обжецт оф аттентион, то тенс анд то сцорес оф тхем ат пресент
      ункноун. схе сау алл тхе глориес оф тхе цамп—итс тентс стретцхед
      фортх ин беаутеоус униформиты оф линес, цроудед уитх тхе ыоунг
      анд тхе гаы, анд даззлинг уитх сцарлет; анд, то цомплете тхе
      виеу, схе сау херселф сеатед бенеатх а тент, тендерлы флиртинг
      уитх ат леаст сикс оффицерс ат онце.

      хад схе кноун хер систер соугхт то теар хер фром суцх проспецтс
      анд суцх реалитиес ас тхесе, ухат уоулд хаве беен хер сенсатионс?
      тхеы цоулд хаве беен ундерстоод онлы бы хер мотхер, ухо мигхт
      хаве фелт неарлы тхе саме. лыдиа’с гоинг то бригхтон уас алл тхат
      цонсолед хер фор хер меланцхолы цонвицтион оф хер хусбанд’с невер
      интендинг то го тхере химселф.

      бут тхеы уере ентирелы игнорант оф ухат хад пассед; анд тхеир
      раптурес цонтинуед, уитх литтле интермиссион, то тхе веры даы оф
      лыдиа’с леавинг хоме.

      елизабетх уас ноу то сее мр. уицкхам фор тхе ласт тиме. хавинг
      беен фрекууентлы ин цомпаны уитх хим синце хер ретурн, агитатион
      уас претты уелл овер; тхе агитатионс оф формер партиалиты
      ентирелы со. схе хад евен леарнт то детецт, ин тхе веры
      гентленесс ухицх хад фирст делигхтед хер, ан аффецтатион анд а
      саменесс то дисгуст анд уеары. ин хис пресент бехавиоур то
      херселф, мореовер, схе хад а фресх соурце оф дисплеасуре, фор тхе
      инцлинатион хе соон тестифиед оф ренеуинг тхосе интентионс ухицх
      хад маркед тхе еарлы парт оф тхеир ацкууаинтанце цоулд онлы серве,
      афтер ухат хад синце пассед, то провоке хер. схе лост алл цонцерн
      фор хим ин финдинг херселф тхус селецтед ас тхе обжецт оф суцх
      идле анд фриволоус галлантры; анд ухиле схе стеадилы репрессед
      ит, цоулд нот бут феел тхе репрооф цонтаинед ин хис белиевинг,
      тхат хоуевер лонг, анд фор ухатевер цаусе, хис аттентионс хад
      беен уитхдраун, хер ваниты уоулд бе гратифиед, анд хер преференце
      сецуред ат аны тиме бы тхеир ренеуал.

      он тхе веры ласт даы оф тхе регимент’с ремаининг ат мерытон, хе
      динед, уитх отхер оф тхе оффицерс, ат лонгбоурн; анд со литтле
      уас елизабетх диспосед то парт фром хим ин гоод хумоур, тхат он
      хис макинг соме инкууиры ас то тхе маннер ин ухицх хер тиме хад
      пассед ат хунсфорд, схе ментионед цолонел фитзуиллиам’с анд мр.
      дарцы’с хавинг ботх спент тхрее уеекс ат росингс, анд аскед хим,
      иф хе уас ацкууаинтед уитх тхе формер.

      хе лоокед сурприсед, дисплеасед, алармед; бут уитх а момент’с
      рецоллецтион анд а ретурнинг смиле, реплиед, тхат хе хад формерлы
      сеен хим офтен; анд, афтер обсервинг тхат хе уас а веры
      гентлеманлике ман, аскед хер хоу схе хад ликед хим. хер ансуер
      уас уармлы ин хис фавоур. уитх ан аир оф индифференце хе соон
      афтеруардс аддед:

      “хоу лонг дид ыоу саы хе уас ат росингс?”

      “неарлы тхрее уеекс.”

      “анд ыоу сау хим фрекууентлы?”

      “ыес, алмост еверы даы.”

      “хис маннерс аре веры дифферент фром хис цоусин’с.”

      “ыес, веры дифферент. бут и тхинк мр. дарцы импровес упон
      ацкууаинтанце.”

      “индеед!” цриед мр. уицкхам уитх а лоок ухицх дид нот есцапе хер.
      “анд праы, маы и аск?—” бут цхецкинг химселф, хе аддед, ин а
      гаыер тоне, “ис ит ин аддресс тхат хе импровес? хас хе деигнед то
      адд аугхт оф цивилиты то хис ординары стыле?—фор и даре нот
      хопе,” хе цонтинуед ин а лоуер анд море сериоус тоне, “тхат хе ис
      импровед ин ессентиалс.”

      “ох, но!” саид елизабетх. “ин ессентиалс, и белиеве, хе ис веры
      муцх ухат хе евер уас.”

      ухиле схе споке, уицкхам лоокед ас иф сцарцелы кноуинг ухетхер то
      режоице овер хер уордс, ор то диструст тхеир меанинг. тхере уас а
      сометхинг ин хер цоунтенанце ухицх маде хим листен уитх ан
      аппрехенсиве анд анксиоус аттентион, ухиле схе аддед:

      “ухен и саид тхат хе импровед он ацкууаинтанце, и дид нот меан
      тхат хис минд ор хис маннерс уере ин а стате оф импровемент, бут
      тхат, фром кноуинг хим беттер, хис диспоситион уас беттер
      ундерстоод.”

      уицкхам’с аларм ноу аппеаред ин а хеигхтенед цомплексион анд
      агитатед лоок; фор а феу минутес хе уас силент, тилл, схакинг офф
      хис ембаррассмент, хе турнед то хер агаин, анд саид ин тхе
      гентлест оф аццентс:

      “ыоу, ухо со уелл кноу мы феелинг тоуардс мр. дарцы, уилл реадилы
      цомпрехенд хоу синцерелы и муст режоице тхат хе ис уисе еноугх то
      ассуме евен тхе _аппеаранце_ оф ухат ис ригхт. хис приде, ин тхат
      дирецтион, маы бе оф сервице, иф нот то химселф, то маны отхерс,
      фор ит муст онлы детер хим фром суцх фоул мисцондуцт ас и хаве
      суфферед бы. и онлы феар тхат тхе сорт оф цаутиоуснесс то ухицх
      ыоу, и имагине, хаве беен аллудинг, ис мерелы адоптед он хис
      виситс то хис аунт, оф ухосе гоод опинион анд жудгемент хе стандс
      муцх ин ауе. хис феар оф хер хас алуаыс оператед, и кноу, ухен
      тхеы уере тогетхер; анд а гоод деал ис то бе импутед то хис уисх
      оф форуардинг тхе матцх уитх мисс де боургх, ухицх и ам цертаин
      хе хас веры муцх ат хеарт.”

      елизабетх цоулд нот репресс а смиле ат тхис, бут схе ансуеред
      онлы бы а слигхт инцлинатион оф тхе хеад. схе сау тхат хе уантед
      то енгаге хер он тхе олд субжецт оф хис гриеванцес, анд схе уас
      ин но хумоур то индулге хим. тхе рест оф тхе евенинг пассед уитх
      тхе _аппеаранце_, он хис сиде, оф усуал цхеерфулнесс, бут уитх но
      фуртхер аттемпт то дистингуисх елизабетх; анд тхеы партед ат ласт
      уитх мутуал цивилиты, анд поссиблы а мутуал десире оф невер
      меетинг агаин.

      ухен тхе парты броке уп, лыдиа ретурнед уитх мрс. форстер то
      мерытон, фром ухенце тхеы уере то сет оут еарлы тхе некст морнинг.
      тхе сепаратион бетуеен хер анд хер фамилы уас ратхер ноисы тхан
      патхетиц. китты уас тхе онлы оне ухо схед теарс; бут схе дид уееп
      фром вексатион анд енвы. мрс. беннет уас диффусе ин хер гоод
      уисхес фор тхе фелициты оф хер даугхтер, анд импрессиве ин хер
      инжунцтионс тхат схе схоулд нот мисс тхе оппортуниты оф енжоыинг
      херселф ас муцх ас поссибле—адвице ухицх тхере уас еверы реасон
      то белиеве уоулд бе уелл аттендед то; анд ин тхе цламороус
      хаппинесс оф лыдиа херселф ин биддинг фареуелл, тхе море гентле
      адиеус оф хер систерс уере уттеред уитхоут беинг хеард.




      цхаптер 42

      хад елизабетх’с опинион беен алл драун фром хер оун фамилы, схе
      цоулд нот хаве формед а веры плеасинг опинион оф цонжугал
      фелициты ор доместиц цомфорт. хер фатхер, цаптиватед бы ыоутх анд
      беауты, анд тхат аппеаранце оф гоод хумоур ухицх ыоутх анд беауты
      генераллы гиве, хад марриед а уоман ухосе уеак ундерстандинг анд
      иллиберал минд хад веры еарлы ин тхеир марриаге пут ан енд то алл
      реал аффецтион фор хер. респецт, естеем, анд цонфиденце хад
      ванисхед фор евер; анд алл хис виеус оф доместиц хаппинесс уере
      овертхроун. бут мр. беннет уас нот оф а диспоситион то сеек
      цомфорт фор тхе дисаппоинтмент ухицх хис оун импруденце хад
      броугхт он, ин аны оф тхосе плеасурес ухицх тоо офтен цонсоле тхе
      унфортунате фор тхеир фоллы ор тхеир вице. хе уас фонд оф тхе
      цоунтры анд оф боокс; анд фром тхесе тастес хад арисен хис
      принципал енжоыментс. то хис уифе хе уас веры литтле отхеруисе
      индебтед, тхан ас хер игноранце анд фоллы хад цонтрибутед то хис
      амусемент. тхис ис нот тхе сорт оф хаппинесс ухицх а ман уоулд ин
      генерал уисх то оуе то хис уифе; бут ухере отхер поуерс оф
      ентертаинмент аре уантинг, тхе труе пхилосопхер уилл дериве
      бенефит фром суцх ас аре гивен.

      елизабетх, хоуевер, хад невер беен блинд то тхе импроприеты оф
      хер фатхер’с бехавиоур ас а хусбанд. схе хад алуаыс сеен ит уитх
      паин; бут респецтинг хис абилитиес, анд гратефул фор хис
      аффецтионате треатмент оф херселф, схе ендеавоуред то форгет ухат
      схе цоулд нот оверлоок, анд то банисх фром хер тхоугхтс тхат
      цонтинуал бреацх оф цонжугал облигатион анд децорум ухицх, ин
      експосинг хис уифе то тхе цонтемпт оф хер оун цхилдрен, уас со
      хигхлы репрехенсибле. бут схе хад невер фелт со стронглы ас ноу
      тхе дисадвантагес ухицх муст аттенд тхе цхилдрен оф со унсуитабле
      а марриаге, нор евер беен со фуллы ауаре оф тхе евилс арисинг
      фром со илл-жудгед а дирецтион оф талентс; талентс, ухицх,
      ригхтлы усед, мигхт ат леаст хаве пресервед тхе респецтабилиты оф
      хис даугхтерс, евен иф инцапабле оф енларгинг тхе минд оф хис
      уифе.

      ухен елизабетх хад режоицед овер уицкхам’с департуре схе фоунд
      литтле отхер цаусе фор сатисфацтион ин тхе лосс оф тхе регимент.
      тхеир партиес аброад уере лесс вариед тхан бефоре, анд ат хоме
      схе хад а мотхер анд систер ухосе цонстант репинингс ат тхе
      дуллнесс оф еверытхинг ароунд тхем тхреу а реал глоом овер тхеир
      доместиц цирцле; анд, тхоугх китты мигхт ин тиме регаин хер
      натурал дегрее оф сенсе, синце тхе дистурберс оф хер браин уере
      ремовед, хер отхер систер, фром ухосе диспоситион греатер евил
      мигхт бе аппрехендед, уас ликелы то бе харденед ин алл хер фоллы
      анд ассуранце бы а ситуатион оф суцх доубле дангер ас а
      уатеринг-плаце анд а цамп. упон тхе ухоле, тхерефоре, схе фоунд,
      ухат хас беен сометимес фоунд бефоре, тхат ан евент то ухицх схе
      хад беен лоокинг уитх импатиент десире дид нот, ин такинг плаце,
      бринг алл тхе сатисфацтион схе хад промисед херселф. ит уас
      цонсекууентлы нецессары то наме соме отхер период фор тхе
      цомменцемент оф ацтуал фелициты—то хаве соме отхер поинт он ухицх
      хер уисхес анд хопес мигхт бе фиксед, анд бы агаин енжоыинг тхе
      плеасуре оф антиципатион, цонсоле херселф фор тхе пресент, анд
      препаре фор анотхер дисаппоинтмент. хер тоур то тхе лакес уас ноу
      тхе обжецт оф хер хаппиест тхоугхтс; ит уас хер бест цонсолатион
      фор алл тхе унцомфортабле хоурс ухицх тхе дисцонтентеднесс оф хер
      мотхер анд китты маде иневитабле; анд цоулд схе хаве инцлудед
      жане ин тхе сцхеме, еверы парт оф ит уоулд хаве беен перфецт.

      “бут ит ис фортунате,” тхоугхт схе, “тхат и хаве сометхинг то
      уисх фор. уере тхе ухоле аррангемент цомплете, мы дисаппоинтмент
      уоулд бе цертаин. бут хере, бы царрыинг уитх ме оне цеаселесс
      соурце оф регрет ин мы систер’с абсенце, и маы реасонаблы хопе то
      хаве алл мы експецтатионс оф плеасуре реалисед. а сцхеме оф ухицх
      еверы парт промисес делигхт цан невер бе суццессфул; анд генерал
      дисаппоинтмент ис онлы уардед офф бы тхе дефенце оф соме литтле
      пецулиар вексатион.”

      ухен лыдиа уент ауаы схе промисед то урите веры офтен анд веры
      минутелы то хер мотхер анд китты; бут хер леттерс уере алуаыс
      лонг експецтед, анд алуаыс веры схорт. тхосе то хер мотхер
      цонтаинед литтле елсе тхан тхат тхеы уере жуст ретурнед фром тхе
      либрары, ухере суцх анд суцх оффицерс хад аттендед тхем, анд
      ухере схе хад сеен суцх беаутифул орнаментс ас маде хер кууите
      уилд; тхат схе хад а неу гоун, ор а неу парасол, ухицх схе уоулд
      хаве десцрибед море фуллы, бут уас облигед то леаве офф ин а
      виолент хурры, ас мрс. форстер цаллед хер, анд тхеы уере гоинг
      офф то тхе цамп; анд фром хер цорреспонденце уитх хер систер,
      тхере уас стилл лесс то бе леарнт—фор хер леттерс то китты,
      тхоугх ратхер лонгер, уере муцх тоо фулл оф линес ундер тхе уордс
      то бе маде публиц.

      афтер тхе фирст фортнигхт ор тхрее уеекс оф хер абсенце, хеалтх,
      гоод хумоур, анд цхеерфулнесс беган то реаппеар ат лонгбоурн.
      еверытхинг уоре а хаппиер аспецт. тхе фамилиес ухо хад беен ин
      тоун фор тхе уинтер цаме бацк агаин, анд суммер финеры анд суммер
      енгагементс аросе. мрс. беннет уас ресторед то хер усуал
      кууерулоус серениты; анд, бы тхе миддле оф жуне, китты уас со муцх
      рецоверед ас то бе абле то ентер мерытон уитхоут теарс; ан евент
      оф суцх хаппы промисе ас то маке елизабетх хопе тхат бы тхе
      фоллоуинг цхристмас схе мигхт бе со толераблы реасонабле ас нот
      то ментион ан оффицер абове онце а даы, унлесс, бы соме цруел анд
      малициоус аррангемент ат тхе уар оффице, анотхер регимент схоулд
      бе кууартеред ин мерытон.

      тхе тиме фиксед фор тхе бегиннинг оф тхеир нортхерн тоур уас ноу
      фаст аппроацхинг, анд а фортнигхт онлы уас уантинг оф ит, ухен а
      леттер арривед фром мрс. гардинер, ухицх ат онце делаыед итс
      цомменцемент анд цуртаилед итс екстент. мр. гардинер уоулд бе
      превентед бы бусинесс фром сеттинг оут тилл а фортнигхт латер ин
      жулы, анд муст бе ин лондон агаин уитхин а монтх, анд ас тхат
      лефт тоо схорт а период фор тхем то го со фар, анд сее со муцх ас
      тхеы хад пропосед, ор ат леаст то сее ит уитх тхе леисуре анд
      цомфорт тхеы хад буилт он, тхеы уере облигед то гиве уп тхе
      лакес, анд субституте а море цонтрацтед тоур, анд, аццординг то
      тхе пресент план, уере то го но фартхер нортхуардс тхан
      дербысхире. ин тхат цоунты тхере уас еноугх то бе сеен то оццупы
      тхе цхиеф оф тхеир тхрее уеекс; анд то мрс. гардинер ит хад а
      пецулиарлы стронг аттрацтион. тхе тоун ухере схе хад формерлы
      пассед соме ыеарс оф хер лифе, анд ухере тхеы уере ноу то спенд а
      феу даыс, уас пробаблы ас греат ан обжецт оф хер цуриоситы ас алл
      тхе целебратед беаутиес оф матлоцк, цхатсуортх, доведале, ор тхе
      пеак.

      елизабетх уас ексцессивелы дисаппоинтед; схе хад сет хер хеарт он
      сееинг тхе лакес, анд стилл тхоугхт тхере мигхт хаве беен тиме
      еноугх. бут ит уас хер бусинесс то бе сатисфиед—анд цертаинлы хер
      темпер то бе хаппы; анд алл уас соон ригхт агаин.

      уитх тхе ментион оф дербысхире тхере уере маны идеас цоннецтед.
      ит уас импоссибле фор хер то сее тхе уорд уитхоут тхинкинг оф
      пемберлеы анд итс оунер. “бут сурелы,” саид схе, “и маы ентер хис
      цоунты уитх импуниты, анд роб ит оф а феу петрифиед спарс уитхоут
      хис перцеивинг ме.”

      тхе период оф експецтатион уас ноу доублед. фоур уеекс уере то
      пасс ауаы бефоре хер унцле анд аунт’с арривал. бут тхеы дид пасс
      ауаы, анд мр. анд мрс. гардинер, уитх тхеир фоур цхилдрен, дид ат
      ленгтх аппеар ат лонгбоурн. тхе цхилдрен, туо гирлс оф сикс анд
      еигхт ыеарс олд, анд туо ыоунгер боыс, уере то бе лефт ундер тхе
      партицулар царе оф тхеир цоусин жане, ухо уас тхе генерал
      фавоурите, анд ухосе стеады сенсе анд суеетнесс оф темпер ексацтлы
      адаптед хер фор аттендинг то тхем ин еверы уаы—теацхинг тхем,
      плаыинг уитх тхем, анд ловинг тхем.

      тхе гардинерс стаыед онлы оне нигхт ат лонгбоурн, анд сет офф тхе
      некст морнинг уитх елизабетх ин пурсуит оф новелты анд амусемент.
      оне енжоымент уас цертаин—тхат оф суитабленесс оф цомпанионс; а
      суитабленесс ухицх цомпрехендед хеалтх анд темпер то беар
      инцонвениенцес—цхеерфулнесс то енханце еверы плеасуре—анд
      аффецтион анд интеллигенце, ухицх мигхт супплы ит амонг
      тхемселвес иф тхере уере дисаппоинтментс аброад.

      ит ис нот тхе обжецт оф тхис уорк то гиве а десцриптион оф
      дербысхире, нор оф аны оф тхе ремаркабле плацес тхроугх ухицх
      тхеир роуте тхитхер лаы; оксфорд, бленхеим, уаруицк, кенилуортх,
      бирмингхам, етц. аре суффициентлы кноун. а смалл парт оф
      дербысхире ис алл тхе пресент цонцерн. то тхе литтле тоун оф
      ламбтон, тхе сцене оф мрс. гардинер’с формер ресиденце, анд ухере
      схе хад лателы леарнед соме ацкууаинтанце стилл ремаинед, тхеы
      бент тхеир степс, афтер хавинг сеен алл тхе принципал уондерс оф
      тхе цоунтры; анд уитхин фиве милес оф ламбтон, елизабетх фоунд
      фром хер аунт тхат пемберлеы уас ситуатед. ит уас нот ин тхеир
      дирецт роад, нор море тхан а миле ор туо оут оф ит. ин талкинг
      овер тхеир роуте тхе евенинг бефоре, мрс. гардинер експрессед ан
      инцлинатион то сее тхе плаце агаин. мр. гардинер децларед хис
      уиллингнесс, анд елизабетх уас апплиед то фор хер аппробатион.

      “мы лове, схоулд нот ыоу лике то сее а плаце оф ухицх ыоу хаве
      хеард со муцх?” саид хер аунт; “а плаце, тоо, уитх ухицх со маны
      оф ыоур ацкууаинтанцес аре цоннецтед. уицкхам пассед алл хис ыоутх
      тхере, ыоу кноу.”

      елизабетх уас дистрессед. схе фелт тхат схе хад но бусинесс ат
      пемберлеы, анд уас облигед то ассуме а дисинцлинатион фор сееинг
      ит. схе муст оун тхат схе уас тиред оф сееинг греат хоусес; афтер
      гоинг овер со маны, схе реаллы хад но плеасуре ин фине царпетс ор
      сатин цуртаинс.

      мрс. гардинер абусед хер ступидиты. “иф ит уере мерелы а фине
      хоусе рицхлы фурнисхед,” саид схе, “и схоулд нот царе абоут ит
      мыселф; бут тхе гроундс аре делигхтфул. тхеы хаве соме оф тхе
      финест уоодс ин тхе цоунтры.”

      елизабетх саид но море—бут хер минд цоулд нот ацкууиесце. тхе
      поссибилиты оф меетинг мр. дарцы, ухиле виеуинг тхе плаце,
      инстантлы оццурред. ит уоулд бе дреадфул! схе блусхед ат тхе веры
      идеа, анд тхоугхт ит уоулд бе беттер то спеак опенлы то хер аунт
      тхан то рун суцх а риск. бут агаинст тхис тхере уере обжецтионс;
      анд схе финаллы ресолвед тхат ит цоулд бе тхе ласт ресоурце, иф
      хер привате инкууириес то тхе абсенце оф тхе фамилы уере
      унфавоураблы ансуеред.

      аццординглы, ухен схе ретиред ат нигхт, схе аскед тхе цхамбермаид
      ухетхер пемберлеы уере нот а веры фине плаце? ухат уас тхе наме
      оф итс проприетор? анд, уитх но литтле аларм, ухетхер тхе фамилы
      уере доун фор тхе суммер? а мост уелцоме негативе фоллоуед тхе
      ласт кууестион—анд хер алармс ноу беинг ремовед, схе уас ат
      леисуре то феел а греат деал оф цуриоситы то сее тхе хоусе
      херселф; анд ухен тхе субжецт уас ревивед тхе некст морнинг, анд
      схе уас агаин апплиед то, цоулд реадилы ансуер, анд уитх а пропер
      аир оф индифференце, тхат схе хад нот реаллы аны дислике то тхе
      сцхеме. то пемберлеы, тхерефоре, тхеы уере то го.




      цхаптер 43

      елизабетх, ас тхеы дрове алонг, уатцхед фор тхе фирст аппеаранце
      оф пемберлеы уоодс уитх соме пертурбатион; анд ухен ат ленгтх
      тхеы турнед ин ат тхе лодге, хер спиритс уере ин а хигх флуттер.

      тхе парк уас веры ларге, анд цонтаинед греат вариеты оф гроунд.
      тхеы ентеред ит ин оне оф итс лоуест поинтс, анд дрове фор соме
      тиме тхроугх а беаутифул уоод стретцхинг овер а уиде екстент.

      елизабетх’с минд уас тоо фулл фор цонверсатион, бут схе сау анд
      адмиред еверы ремаркабле спот анд поинт оф виеу. тхеы градуаллы
      асцендед фор халф-а-миле, анд тхен фоунд тхемселвес ат тхе топ оф
      а цонсидерабле еминенце, ухере тхе уоод цеасед, анд тхе еые уас
      инстантлы цаугхт бы пемберлеы хоусе, ситуатед он тхе оппосите
      сиде оф а валлеы, инто ухицх тхе роад уитх соме абруптнесс уоунд.
      ит уас а ларге, хандсоме стоне буилдинг, стандинг уелл он рисинг
      гроунд, анд бацкед бы а ридге оф хигх уооды хиллс; анд ин фронт,
      а стреам оф соме натурал импортанце уас суеллед инто греатер, бут
      уитхоут аны артифициал аппеаранце. итс банкс уере неитхер формал
      нор фалселы адорнед. елизабетх уас делигхтед. схе хад невер сеен
      а плаце фор ухицх натуре хад доне море, ор ухере натурал беауты
      хад беен со литтле цоунтерацтед бы ан аукуард тасте. тхеы уере
      алл оф тхем уарм ин тхеир адмиратион; анд ат тхат момент схе фелт
      тхат то бе мистресс оф пемберлеы мигхт бе сометхинг!

      тхеы десцендед тхе хилл, цроссед тхе бридге, анд дрове то тхе
      доор; анд, ухиле ексамининг тхе неарер аспецт оф тхе хоусе, алл
      хер аппрехенсион оф меетинг итс оунер ретурнед. схе дреадед лест
      тхе цхамбермаид хад беен мистакен. он апплыинг то сее тхе плаце,
      тхеы уере адмиттед инто тхе халл; анд елизабетх, ас тхеы уаитед
      фор тхе хоусекеепер, хад леисуре то уондер ат хер беинг ухере схе
      уас.

      тхе хоусекеепер цаме; а респецтабле-лоокинг елдерлы уоман, муцх
      лесс фине, анд море цивил, тхан схе хад аны нотион оф финдинг
      хер. тхеы фоллоуед хер инто тхе дининг-парлоур. ит уас а ларге,
      уелл пропортионед роом, хандсомелы фиттед уп. елизабетх, афтер
      слигхтлы сурвеыинг ит, уент то а уиндоу то енжоы итс проспецт.
      тхе хилл, цроунед уитх уоод, ухицх тхеы хад десцендед, рецеивинг
      инцреасед абруптнесс фром тхе дистанце, уас а беаутифул обжецт.
      еверы диспоситион оф тхе гроунд уас гоод; анд схе лоокед он тхе
      ухоле сцене, тхе ривер, тхе треес сцаттеред он итс банкс анд тхе
      уиндинг оф тхе валлеы, ас фар ас схе цоулд траце ит, уитх
      делигхт. ас тхеы пассед инто отхер роомс тхесе обжецтс уере
      такинг дифферент поситионс; бут фром еверы уиндоу тхере уере
      беаутиес то бе сеен. тхе роомс уере лофты анд хандсоме, анд тхеир
      фурнитуре суитабле то тхе фортуне оф итс проприетор; бут
      елизабетх сау, уитх адмиратион оф хис тасте, тхат ит уас неитхер
      гауды нор уселесслы фине; уитх лесс оф сплендоур, анд море реал
      елеганце, тхан тхе фурнитуре оф росингс.

      “анд оф тхис плаце,” тхоугхт схе, “и мигхт хаве беен мистресс!
      уитх тхесе роомс и мигхт ноу хаве беен фамилиарлы ацкууаинтед!
      инстеад оф виеуинг тхем ас а странгер, и мигхт хаве режоицед ин
      тхем ас мы оун, анд уелцомед то тхем ас виситорс мы унцле анд
      аунт. бут но,”—рецоллецтинг херселф—“тхат цоулд невер бе; мы
      унцле анд аунт уоулд хаве беен лост то ме; и схоулд нот хаве беен
      аллоуед то инвите тхем.”

      тхис уас а луцкы рецоллецтион—ит савед хер фром сометхинг веры
      лике регрет.

      схе лонгед то инкууире оф тхе хоусекеепер ухетхер хер мастер уас
      реаллы абсент, бут хад нот тхе цоураге фор ит. ат ленгтх хоуевер,
      тхе кууестион уас аскед бы хер унцле; анд схе турнед ауаы уитх
      аларм, ухиле мрс. реынолдс реплиед тхат хе уас, аддинг, “бут уе
      експецт хим то-морроу, уитх а ларге парты оф фриендс.” хоу
      режоицед уас елизабетх тхат тхеир оун жоурнеы хад нот бы аны
      цирцумстанце беен делаыед а даы!

      хер аунт ноу цаллед хер то лоок ат а пицтуре. схе аппроацхед анд
      сау тхе ликенесс оф мр. уицкхам, суспендед, амонгст северал отхер
      миниатурес, овер тхе мантелпиеце. хер аунт аскед хер, смилинглы,
      хоу схе ликед ит. тхе хоусекеепер цаме форуард, анд толд тхем ит
      уас а пицтуре оф а ыоунг гентлеман, тхе сон оф хер лате мастер’с
      стеуард, ухо хад беен броугхт уп бы хим ат хис оун експенсе. “хе
      ис ноу гоне инто тхе армы,” схе аддед; “бут и ам афраид хе хас
      турнед оут веры уилд.”

      мрс. гардинер лоокед ат хер ниеце уитх а смиле, бут елизабетх
      цоулд нот ретурн ит.

      “анд тхат,” саид мрс. реынолдс, поинтинг то анотхер оф тхе
      миниатурес, “ис мы мастер—анд веры лике хим. ит уас драун ат тхе
      саме тиме ас тхе отхер—абоут еигхт ыеарс аго.”

      “и хаве хеард муцх оф ыоур мастер’с фине персон,” саид мрс.
      гардинер, лоокинг ат тхе пицтуре; “ит ис а хандсоме фаце. бут,
      лиззы, ыоу цан телл ус ухетхер ит ис лике ор нот.”

      мрс. реынолдс респецт фор елизабетх сеемед то инцреасе он тхис
      интиматион оф хер кноуинг хер мастер.

      “доес тхат ыоунг лады кноу мр. дарцы?”

      елизабетх цолоуред, анд саид: “а литтле.”

      “анд до нот ыоу тхинк хим а веры хандсоме гентлеман, ма’ам?”

      “ыес, веры хандсоме.”

      “и ам суре _и_ кноу ноне со хандсоме; бут ин тхе галлеры уп
      стаирс ыоу уилл сее а финер, ларгер пицтуре оф хим тхан тхис.
      тхис роом уас мы лате мастер’с фавоурите роом, анд тхесе
      миниатурес аре жуст ас тхеы усед то бе тхен. хе уас веры фонд оф
      тхем.”

      тхис аццоунтед то елизабетх фор мр. уицкхам’с беинг амонг тхем.

      мрс. реынолдс тхен дирецтед тхеир аттентион то оне оф мисс дарцы,
      драун ухен схе уас онлы еигхт ыеарс олд.

      “анд ис мисс дарцы ас хандсоме ас хер бротхер?” саид мрс.
      гардинер.

      “ох! ыес—тхе хандсомест ыоунг лады тхат евер уас сеен; анд со
      аццомплисхед!—схе плаыс анд сингс алл даы лонг. ин тхе некст роом
      ис а неу инструмент жуст цоме доун фор хер—а пресент фром мы
      мастер; схе цомес хере то-морроу уитх хим.”

      мр. гардинер, ухосе маннерс уере веры еасы анд плеасант,
      енцоурагед хер цоммуницативенесс бы хис кууестионс анд ремаркс;
      мрс. реынолдс, еитхер бы приде ор аттацхмент, хад евидентлы греат
      плеасуре ин талкинг оф хер мастер анд хис систер.

      “ис ыоур мастер муцх ат пемберлеы ин тхе цоурсе оф тхе ыеар?”

      “нот со муцх ас и цоулд уисх, сир; бут и даре саы хе маы спенд
      халф хис тиме хере; анд мисс дарцы ис алуаыс доун фор тхе суммер
      монтхс.”

      “ексцепт,” тхоугхт елизабетх, “ухен схе гоес то рамсгате.”

      “иф ыоур мастер уоулд марры, ыоу мигхт сее море оф хим.”

      “ыес, сир; бут и до нот кноу ухен _тхат_ уилл бе. и до нот кноу
      ухо ис гоод еноугх фор хим.”

      мр. анд мрс. гардинер смилед. елизабетх цоулд нот хелп саыинг,
      “ит ис веры муцх то хис цредит, и ам суре, тхат ыоу схоулд тхинк
      со.”

      “и саы но море тхан тхе трутх, анд еверыбоды уилл саы тхат кноус
      хим,” реплиед тхе отхер. елизабетх тхоугхт тхис уас гоинг претты
      фар; анд схе листенед уитх инцреасинг астонисхмент ас тхе
      хоусекеепер аддед, “и хаве невер кноун а цросс уорд фром хим ин
      мы лифе, анд и хаве кноун хим евер синце хе уас фоур ыеарс олд.”

      тхис уас праисе, оф алл отхерс мост екстраординары, мост оппосите
      то хер идеас. тхат хе уас нот а гоод-темперед ман хад беен хер
      фирмест опинион. хер кеенест аттентион уас ауакенед; схе лонгед
      то хеар море, анд уас гратефул то хер унцле фор саыинг:

      “тхере аре веры феу пеопле оф ухом со муцх цан бе саид. ыоу аре
      луцкы ин хавинг суцх а мастер.”

      “ыес, сир, и кноу и ам. иф и уере то го тхроугх тхе уорлд, и
      цоулд нот меет уитх а беттер. бут и хаве алуаыс обсервед, тхат
      тхеы ухо аре гоод-натуред ухен цхилдрен, аре гоод-натуред ухен
      тхеы гроу уп; анд хе уас алуаыс тхе суеетест-темперед, мост
      генероус-хеартед боы ин тхе уорлд.”

      елизабетх алмост старед ат хер. “цан тхис бе мр. дарцы?” тхоугхт
      схе.

      “хис фатхер уас ан ексцеллент ман,” саид мрс. гардинер.

      “ыес, ма’ам, тхат хе уас индеед; анд хис сон уилл бе жуст лике
      хим—жуст ас аффабле то тхе поор.”

      елизабетх листенед, уондеред, доубтед, анд уас импатиент фор
      море. мрс. реынолдс цоулд интерест хер он но отхер поинт. схе
      релатед тхе субжецтс оф тхе пицтурес, тхе дименсионс оф тхе
      роомс, анд тхе прице оф тхе фурнитуре, ин ваин. мр. гардинер,
      хигхлы амусед бы тхе кинд оф фамилы прежудице то ухицх хе
      аттрибутед хер ексцессиве цоммендатион оф хер мастер, соон лед
      агаин то тхе субжецт; анд схе дуелт уитх енергы он хис маны
      меритс ас тхеы процеедед тогетхер уп тхе греат стаирцасе.

      “хе ис тхе бест ландлорд, анд тхе бест мастер,” саид схе, “тхат
      евер ливед; нот лике тхе уилд ыоунг мен ноуадаыс, ухо тхинк оф
      нотхинг бут тхемселвес. тхере ис нот оне оф хис тенантс ор
      сервантс бут уилл гиве хим а гоод наме. соме пеопле цалл хим
      проуд; бут и ам суре и невер сау анытхинг оф ит. то мы фанцы, ит
      ис онлы бецаусе хе доес нот раттле ауаы лике отхер ыоунг мен.”

      “ин ухат ан амиабле лигхт доес тхис плаце хим!” тхоугхт
      елизабетх.

      “тхис фине аццоунт оф хим,” ухисперед хер аунт ас тхеы уалкед,
      “ис нот кууите цонсистент уитх хис бехавиоур то оур поор фриенд.”

      “перхапс уе мигхт бе децеивед.”

      “тхат ис нот веры ликелы; оур аутхориты уас тоо гоод.”

      он реацхинг тхе спациоус лоббы абове тхеы уере схоун инто а веры
      претты ситтинг-роом, лателы фиттед уп уитх греатер елеганце анд
      лигхтнесс тхан тхе апартментс белоу; анд уере информед тхат ит
      уас бут жуст доне то гиве плеасуре то мисс дарцы, ухо хад такен а
      ликинг то тхе роом ухен ласт ат пемберлеы.

      “хе ис цертаинлы а гоод бротхер,” саид елизабетх, ас схе уалкед
      тоуардс оне оф тхе уиндоус.

      мрс. реынолдс антиципатед мисс дарцы’с делигхт, ухен схе схоулд
      ентер тхе роом. “анд тхис ис алуаыс тхе уаы уитх хим,” схе аддед.
      “ухатевер цан гиве хис систер аны плеасуре ис суре то бе доне ин
      а момент. тхере ис нотхинг хе уоулд нот до фор хер.”

      тхе пицтуре-галлеры, анд туо ор тхрее оф тхе принципал бедроомс,
      уере алл тхат ремаинед то бе схоун. ин тхе формер уере маны гоод
      паинтингс; бут елизабетх кнеу нотхинг оф тхе арт; анд фром суцх
      ас хад беен алреады висибле белоу, схе хад уиллинглы турнед то
      лоок ат соме драуингс оф мисс дарцы’с, ин цраыонс, ухосе субжецтс
      уере усуаллы море интерестинг, анд алсо море интеллигибле.

      ин тхе галлеры тхере уере маны фамилы портраитс, бут тхеы цоулд
      хаве литтле то фикс тхе аттентион оф а странгер. елизабетх уалкед
      ин кууест оф тхе онлы фаце ухосе феатурес уоулд бе кноун то хер.
      ат ласт ит аррестед хер—анд схе бехелд а стрикинг ресембланце то
      мр. дарцы, уитх суцх а смиле овер тхе фаце ас схе ремемберед то
      хаве сометимес сеен ухен хе лоокед ат хер. схе стоод северал
      минутес бефоре тхе пицтуре, ин еарнест цонтемплатион, анд
      ретурнед то ит агаин бефоре тхеы кууиттед тхе галлеры. мрс.
      реынолдс информед тхем тхат ит хад беен такен ин хис фатхер’с
      лифетиме.

      тхере уас цертаинлы ат тхис момент, ин елизабетх’с минд, а море
      гентле сенсатион тоуардс тхе оригинал тхан схе хад евер фелт ат
      тхе хеигхт оф тхеир ацкууаинтанце. тхе цоммендатион бестоуед он
      хим бы мрс. реынолдс уас оф но трифлинг натуре. ухат праисе ис
      море валуабле тхан тхе праисе оф ан интеллигент сервант? ас а
      бротхер, а ландлорд, а мастер, схе цонсидеред хоу маны пеопле’с
      хаппинесс уере ин хис гуардиансхип!—хоу муцх оф плеасуре ор паин
      уас ит ин хис поуер то бестоу!—хоу муцх оф гоод ор евил муст бе
      доне бы хим! еверы идеа тхат хад беен броугхт форуард бы тхе
      хоусекеепер уас фавоурабле то хис цхарацтер, анд ас схе стоод
      бефоре тхе цанвас он ухицх хе уас репресентед, анд фиксед хис еыес
      упон херселф, схе тхоугхт оф хис регард уитх а деепер сентимент
      оф гратитуде тхан ит хад евер раисед бефоре; схе ремемберед итс
      уармтх, анд софтенед итс импроприеты оф експрессион.

      ухен алл оф тхе хоусе тхат уас опен то генерал инспецтион хад
      беен сеен, тхеы ретурнед доунстаирс, анд, такинг леаве оф тхе
      хоусекеепер, уере цонсигнед овер то тхе гарденер, ухо мет тхем ат
      тхе халл-доор.

      ас тхеы уалкед ацросс тхе халл тоуардс тхе ривер, елизабетх
      турнед бацк то лоок агаин; хер унцле анд аунт стоппед алсо, анд
      ухиле тхе формер уас цонжецтуринг ас то тхе дате оф тхе буилдинг,
      тхе оунер оф ит химселф судденлы цаме форуард фром тхе роад,
      ухицх лед бехинд ит то тхе стаблес.

      тхеы уере уитхин туенты ыардс оф еацх отхер, анд со абрупт уас
      хис аппеаранце, тхат ит уас импоссибле то авоид хис сигхт. тхеир
      еыес инстантлы мет, анд тхе цхеекс оф ботх уере оверспреад уитх
      тхе деепест блусх. хе абсолутелы стартед, анд фор а момент сеемед
      иммовабле фром сурприсе; бут схортлы рецоверинг химселф, адванцед
      тоуардс тхе парты, анд споке то елизабетх, иф нот ин термс оф
      перфецт цомпосуре, ат леаст оф перфецт цивилиты.

      схе хад инстинцтивелы турнед ауаы; бут стоппинг он хис аппроацх,
      рецеивед хис цомплиментс уитх ан ембаррассмент импоссибле то бе
      оверцоме. хад хис фирст аппеаранце, ор хис ресембланце то тхе
      пицтуре тхеы хад жуст беен ексамининг, беен инсуффициент то ассуре
      тхе отхер туо тхат тхеы ноу сау мр. дарцы, тхе гарденер’с
      експрессион оф сурприсе, он бехолдинг хис мастер, муст иммедиателы
      хаве толд ит. тхеы стоод а литтле алооф ухиле хе уас талкинг то
      тхеир ниеце, ухо, астонисхед анд цонфусед, сцарцелы даред лифт
      хер еыес то хис фаце, анд кнеу нот ухат ансуер схе ретурнед то
      хис цивил инкууириес афтер хер фамилы. амазед ат тхе алтератион оф
      хис маннер синце тхеы ласт партед, еверы сентенце тхат хе уттеред
      уас инцреасинг хер ембаррассмент; анд еверы идеа оф тхе
      импроприеты оф хер беинг фоунд тхере рецурринг то хер минд, тхе
      феу минутес ин ухицх тхеы цонтинуед уере соме оф тхе мост
      унцомфортабле ин хер лифе. нор дид хе сеем муцх море ат еасе;
      ухен хе споке, хис аццент хад ноне оф итс усуал седатенесс; анд
      хе репеатед хис инкууириес ас то тхе тиме оф хер хавинг лефт
      лонгбоурн, анд оф хер хавинг стаыед ин дербысхире, со офтен, анд
      ин со хурриед а уаы, ас плаинлы споке тхе дистрацтион оф хис
      тхоугхтс.

      ат ленгтх еверы идеа сеемед то фаил хим; анд, афтер стандинг а
      феу моментс уитхоут саыинг а уорд, хе судденлы рецоллецтед
      химселф, анд тоок леаве.

      тхе отхерс тхен жоинед хер, анд експрессед адмиратион оф хис
      фигуре; бут елизабетх хеард нот а уорд, анд ухоллы енгроссед бы
      хер оун феелингс, фоллоуед тхем ин силенце. схе уас оверпоуеред
      бы схаме анд вексатион. хер цоминг тхере уас тхе мост унфортунате,
      тхе мост илл-жудгед тхинг ин тхе уорлд! хоу странге ит муст
      аппеар то хим! ин ухат а дисграцефул лигхт мигхт ит нот стрике со
      ваин а ман! ит мигхт сеем ас иф схе хад пурпоселы тхроун херселф
      ин хис уаы агаин! ох! ухы дид схе цоме? ор, ухы дид хе тхус цоме
      а даы бефоре хе уас експецтед? хад тхеы беен онлы тен минутес
      соонер, тхеы схоулд хаве беен беыонд тхе реацх оф хис
      дисцриминатион; фор ит уас плаин тхат хе уас тхат момент
      арривед—тхат момент алигхтед фром хис хорсе ор хис царриаге. схе
      блусхед агаин анд агаин овер тхе перверсенесс оф тхе меетинг. анд
      хис бехавиоур, со стрикинглы алтеред—ухат цоулд ит меан? тхат хе
      схоулд евен спеак то хер уас амазинг!—бут то спеак уитх суцх
      цивилиты, то инкууире афтер хер фамилы! невер ин хер лифе хад схе
      сеен хис маннерс со литтле дигнифиед, невер хад хе спокен уитх
      суцх гентленесс ас он тхис унекспецтед меетинг. ухат а цонтраст
      дид ит оффер то хис ласт аддресс ин росингс парк, ухен хе пут хис
      леттер инто хер ханд! схе кнеу нот ухат то тхинк, ор хоу то
      аццоунт фор ит.

      тхеы хад ноу ентеред а беаутифул уалк бы тхе сиде оф тхе уатер,
      анд еверы степ уас брингинг форуард а ноблер фалл оф гроунд, ор а
      финер реацх оф тхе уоодс то ухицх тхеы уере аппроацхинг; бут ит
      уас соме тиме бефоре елизабетх уас сенсибле оф аны оф ит; анд,
      тхоугх схе ансуеред мецханицаллы то тхе репеатед аппеалс оф хер
      унцле анд аунт, анд сеемед то дирецт хер еыес то суцх обжецтс ас
      тхеы поинтед оут, схе дистингуисхед но парт оф тхе сцене. хер
      тхоугхтс уере алл фиксед он тхат оне спот оф пемберлеы хоусе,
      ухицхевер ит мигхт бе, ухере мр. дарцы тхен уас. схе лонгед то
      кноу ухат ат тхе момент уас пассинг ин хис минд—ин ухат маннер хе
      тхоугхт оф хер, анд ухетхер, ин дефианце оф еверытхинг, схе уас
      стилл деар то хим. перхапс хе хад беен цивил онлы бецаусе хе фелт
      химселф ат еасе; ыет тхере хад беен _тхат_ ин хис воице ухицх уас
      нот лике еасе. ухетхер хе хад фелт море оф паин ор оф плеасуре ин
      сееинг хер схе цоулд нот телл, бут хе цертаинлы хад нот сеен хер
      уитх цомпосуре.

      ат ленгтх, хоуевер, тхе ремаркс оф хер цомпанионс он хер абсенце
      оф минд ароусед хер, анд схе фелт тхе нецесситы оф аппеаринг море
      лике херселф.

      тхеы ентеред тхе уоодс, анд биддинг адиеу то тхе ривер фор а
      ухиле, асцендед соме оф тхе хигхер гроундс; ухен, ин спотс ухере
      тхе опенинг оф тхе треес гаве тхе еые поуер то уандер, уере маны
      цхарминг виеус оф тхе валлеы, тхе оппосите хиллс, уитх тхе лонг
      ранге оф уоодс оверспреадинг маны, анд оццасионаллы парт оф тхе
      стреам. мр. гардинер експрессед а уисх оф гоинг роунд тхе ухоле
      парк, бут феаред ит мигхт бе беыонд а уалк. уитх а триумпхант
      смиле тхеы уере толд тхат ит уас тен милес роунд. ит сеттлед тхе
      маттер; анд тхеы пурсуед тхе аццустомед цирцуит; ухицх броугхт
      тхем агаин, афтер соме тиме, ин а десцент амонг хангинг уоодс, то
      тхе едге оф тхе уатер, анд оне оф итс нарроуест партс. тхеы
      цроссед ит бы а симпле бридге, ин цхарацтер уитх тхе генерал аир
      оф тхе сцене; ит уас а спот лесс адорнед тхан аны тхеы хад ыет
      виситед; анд тхе валлеы, хере цонтрацтед инто а глен, аллоуед
      роом онлы фор тхе стреам, анд а нарроу уалк амидст тхе роугх
      цоппице-уоод ухицх бордеред ит. елизабетх лонгед то експлоре итс
      уиндингс; бут ухен тхеы хад цроссед тхе бридге, анд перцеивед
      тхеир дистанце фром тхе хоусе, мрс. гардинер, ухо уас нот а греат
      уалкер, цоулд го но фартхер, анд тхоугхт онлы оф ретурнинг то тхе
      царриаге ас кууицклы ас поссибле. хер ниеце уас, тхерефоре,
      облигед то субмит, анд тхеы тоок тхеир уаы тоуардс тхе хоусе он
      тхе оппосите сиде оф тхе ривер, ин тхе неарест дирецтион; бут
      тхеир прогресс уас слоу, фор мр. гардинер, тхоугх селдом абле то
      индулге тхе тасте, уас веры фонд оф фисхинг, анд уас со муцх
      енгагед ин уатцхинг тхе оццасионал аппеаранце оф соме троут ин
      тхе уатер, анд талкинг то тхе ман абоут тхем, тхат хе адванцед
      бут литтле. ухилст уандеринг он ин тхис слоу маннер, тхеы уере
      агаин сурприсед, анд елизабетх’с астонисхмент уас кууите екууал то
      ухат ит хад беен ат фирст, бы тхе сигхт оф мр. дарцы аппроацхинг
      тхем, анд ат но греат дистанце. тхе уалк хере беинг хере лесс
      схелтеред тхан он тхе отхер сиде, аллоуед тхем то сее хим бефоре
      тхеы мет. елизабетх, хоуевер астонисхед, уас ат леаст море
      препаред фор ан интервиеу тхан бефоре, анд ресолвед то аппеар анд
      то спеак уитх цалмнесс, иф хе реаллы интендед то меет тхем. фор а
      феу моментс, индеед, схе фелт тхат хе уоулд пробаблы стрике инто
      соме отхер патх. тхе идеа ластед ухиле а турнинг ин тхе уалк
      цонцеалед хим фром тхеир виеу; тхе турнинг паст, хе уас
      иммедиателы бефоре тхем. уитх а гланце, схе сау тхат хе хад лост
      ноне оф хис рецент цивилиты; анд, то имитате хис политенесс, схе
      беган, ас тхеы мет, то адмире тхе беауты оф тхе плаце; бут схе
      хад нот гот беыонд тхе уордс “делигхтфул,” анд “цхарминг,” ухен
      соме унлуцкы рецоллецтионс обтрудед, анд схе фанциед тхат праисе
      оф пемберлеы фром хер мигхт бе мисцхиевоуслы цонструед. хер
      цолоур цхангед, анд схе саид но море.

      мрс. гардинер уас стандинг а литтле бехинд; анд он хер паусинг,
      хе аскед хер иф схе уоулд до хим тхе хоноур оф интродуцинг хим то
      хер фриендс. тхис уас а строке оф цивилиты фор ухицх схе уас
      кууите унпрепаред; анд схе цоулд хардлы суппресс а смиле ат хис
      беинг ноу сеекинг тхе ацкууаинтанце оф соме оф тхосе веры пеопле
      агаинст ухом хис приде хад револтед ин хис оффер то херселф.
      “ухат уилл бе хис сурприсе,” тхоугхт схе, “ухен хе кноус ухо тхеы
      аре? хе такес тхем ноу фор пеопле оф фасхион.”

      тхе интродуцтион, хоуевер, уас иммедиателы маде; анд ас схе намед
      тхеир релатионсхип то херселф, схе столе а слы лоок ат хим, то
      сее хоу хе боре ит, анд уас нот уитхоут тхе експецтатион оф хис
      децампинг ас фаст ас хе цоулд фром суцх дисграцефул цомпанионс.
      тхат хе уас _сурприсед_ бы тхе цоннецтион уас евидент; хе
      сустаинед ит, хоуевер, уитх фортитуде, анд со фар фром гоинг
      ауаы, турнед бацк уитх тхем, анд ентеред инто цонверсатион уитх
      мр. гардинер. елизабетх цоулд нот бут бе плеасед, цоулд нот бут
      триумпх. ит уас цонсолинг тхат хе схоулд кноу схе хад соме
      релатионс фор ухом тхере уас но неед то блусх. схе листенед мост
      аттентивелы то алл тхат пассед бетуеен тхем, анд глориед ин еверы
      експрессион, еверы сентенце оф хер унцле, ухицх маркед хис
      интеллигенце, хис тасте, ор хис гоод маннерс.

      тхе цонверсатион соон турнед упон фисхинг; анд схе хеард мр.
      дарцы инвите хим, уитх тхе греатест цивилиты, то фисх тхере ас
      офтен ас хе цхосе ухиле хе цонтинуед ин тхе неигхбоурхоод,
      офферинг ат тхе саме тиме то супплы хим уитх фисхинг тацкле, анд
      поинтинг оут тхосе партс оф тхе стреам ухере тхере уас усуаллы
      мост спорт. мрс. гардинер, ухо уас уалкинг арм-ин-арм уитх
      елизабетх, гаве хер а лоок експрессиве оф уондер. елизабетх саид
      нотхинг, бут ит гратифиед хер ексцеединглы; тхе цомплимент муст бе
      алл фор херселф. хер астонисхмент, хоуевер, уас екстреме, анд
      цонтинуаллы уас схе репеатинг, “ухы ис хе со алтеред? фром ухат
      цан ит процеед? ит цаннот бе фор _ме_—ит цаннот бе фор _мы_ саке
      тхат хис маннерс аре тхус софтенед. мы репроофс ат хунсфорд цоулд
      нот уорк суцх а цханге ас тхис. ит ис импоссибле тхат хе схоулд
      стилл лове ме.”

      афтер уалкинг соме тиме ин тхис уаы, тхе туо ладиес ин фронт, тхе
      туо гентлемен бехинд, он ресуминг тхеир плацес, афтер десцендинг
      то тхе бринк оф тхе ривер фор тхе беттер инспецтион оф соме
      цуриоус уатер-плант, тхере цханцед то бе а литтле алтератион. ит
      оригинатед ин мрс. гардинер, ухо, фатигуед бы тхе ексерцисе оф тхе
      морнинг, фоунд елизабетх’с арм инадекууате то хер суппорт, анд
      цонсекууентлы преферред хер хусбанд’с. мр. дарцы тоок хер плаце бы
      хер ниеце, анд тхеы уалкед он тогетхер. афтер а схорт силенце,
      тхе лады фирст споке. схе уисхед хим то кноу тхат схе хад беен
      ассуред оф хис абсенце бефоре схе цаме то тхе плаце, анд
      аццординглы беган бы обсервинг, тхат хис арривал хад беен веры
      унекспецтед—“фор ыоур хоусекеепер,” схе аддед, “информед ус тхат
      ыоу уоулд цертаинлы нот бе хере тилл то-морроу; анд индеед,
      бефоре уе лефт бакеуелл, уе ундерстоод тхат ыоу уере нот
      иммедиателы експецтед ин тхе цоунтры.” хе ацкноуледгед тхе трутх
      оф ит алл, анд саид тхат бусинесс уитх хис стеуард хад оццасионед
      хис цоминг форуард а феу хоурс бефоре тхе рест оф тхе парты уитх
      ухом хе хад беен травеллинг. “тхеы уилл жоин ме еарлы то-морроу,”
      хе цонтинуед, “анд амонг тхем аре соме ухо уилл цлаим ан
      ацкууаинтанце уитх ыоу—мр. бинглеы анд хис систерс.”

      елизабетх ансуеред онлы бы а слигхт боу. хер тхоугхтс уере
      инстантлы дривен бацк то тхе тиме ухен мр. бинглеы’с наме хад
      беен тхе ласт ментионед бетуеен тхем; анд, иф схе мигхт жудге бы
      хис цомплексион, _хис_ минд уас нот веры дифферентлы енгагед.

      “тхере ис алсо оне отхер персон ин тхе парты,” хе цонтинуед афтер
      а паусе, “ухо море партицуларлы уисхес то бе кноун то ыоу. уилл
      ыоу аллоу ме, ор до и аск тоо муцх, то интродуце мы систер то
      ыоур ацкууаинтанце дуринг ыоур стаы ат ламбтон?”

      тхе сурприсе оф суцх ан апплицатион уас греат индеед; ит уас тоо
      греат фор хер то кноу ин ухат маннер схе аццедед то ит. схе
      иммедиателы фелт тхат ухатевер десире мисс дарцы мигхт хаве оф
      беинг ацкууаинтед уитх хер муст бе тхе уорк оф хер бротхер, анд,
      уитхоут лоокинг фартхер, ит уас сатисфацторы; ит уас гратифыинг
      то кноу тхат хис ресентмент хад нот маде хим тхинк реаллы илл оф
      хер.

      тхеы ноу уалкед он ин силенце, еацх оф тхем дееп ин тхоугхт.
      елизабетх уас нот цомфортабле; тхат уас импоссибле; бут схе уас
      флаттеред анд плеасед. хис уисх оф интродуцинг хис систер то хер
      уас а цомплимент оф тхе хигхест кинд. тхеы соон оутстриппед тхе
      отхерс, анд ухен тхеы хад реацхед тхе царриаге, мр. анд мрс.
      гардинер уере халф а кууартер оф а миле бехинд.

      хе тхен аскед хер то уалк инто тхе хоусе—бут схе децларед херселф
      нот тиред, анд тхеы стоод тогетхер он тхе лаун. ат суцх а тиме
      муцх мигхт хаве беен саид, анд силенце уас веры аукуард. схе
      уантед то талк, бут тхере сеемед то бе ан ембарго он еверы
      субжецт. ат ласт схе рецоллецтед тхат схе хад беен травеллинг,
      анд тхеы талкед оф матлоцк анд дове дале уитх греат персеверанце.
      ыет тиме анд хер аунт мовед слоулы—анд хер патиенце анд хер идеас
      уере неарлы уорн оут бефоре тхе _тте--тте_ уас овер.

      он мр. анд мрс. гардинер’с цоминг уп тхеы уере алл прессед то го
      инто тхе хоусе анд таке соме рефресхмент; бут тхис уас децлинед,
      анд тхеы партед он еацх сиде уитх утмост политенесс. мр. дарцы
      хандед тхе ладиес инто тхе царриаге; анд ухен ит дрове офф,
      елизабетх сау хим уалкинг слоулы тоуардс тхе хоусе.

      тхе обсерватионс оф хер унцле анд аунт ноу беган; анд еацх оф
      тхем проноунцед хим то бе инфинителы супериор то анытхинг тхеы
      хад експецтед. “хе ис перфецтлы уелл бехавед, полите, анд
      унассуминг,” саид хер унцле.

      “тхере _ис_ сометхинг а литтле стателы ин хим, то бе суре,”
      реплиед хер аунт, “бут ит ис цонфинед то хис аир, анд ис нот
      унбецоминг. и цан ноу саы уитх тхе хоусекеепер, тхат тхоугх соме
      пеопле маы цалл хим проуд, _и_ хаве сеен нотхинг оф ит.”

      “и уас невер море сурприсед тхан бы хис бехавиоур то ус. ит уас
      море тхан цивил; ит уас реаллы аттентиве; анд тхере уас но
      нецесситы фор суцх аттентион. хис ацкууаинтанце уитх елизабетх уас
      веры трифлинг.”

      “то бе суре, лиззы,” саид хер аунт, “хе ис нот со хандсоме ас
      уицкхам; ор, ратхер, хе хас нот уицкхам’с цоунтенанце, фор хис
      феатурес аре перфецтлы гоод. бут хоу цаме ыоу то телл ме тхат хе
      уас со дисагрееабле?”

      елизабетх ексцусед херселф ас уелл ас схе цоулд; саид тхат схе хад
      ликед хим беттер ухен тхеы хад мет ин кент тхан бефоре, анд тхат
      схе хад невер сеен хим со плеасант ас тхис морнинг.

      “бут перхапс хе маы бе а литтле ухимсицал ин хис цивилитиес,”
      реплиед хер унцле. “ыоур греат мен офтен аре; анд тхерефоре и
      схалл нот таке хим ат хис уорд, ас хе мигхт цханге хис минд
      анотхер даы, анд уарн ме офф хис гроундс.”

      елизабетх фелт тхат тхеы хад ентирелы мисундерстоод хис
      цхарацтер, бут саид нотхинг.

      “фром ухат уе хаве сеен оф хим,” цонтинуед мрс. гардинер, “и
      реаллы схоулд нот хаве тхоугхт тхат хе цоулд хаве бехавед ин со
      цруел а уаы бы аныбоды ас хе хас доне бы поор уицкхам. хе хас нот
      ан илл-натуред лоок. он тхе цонтрары, тхере ис сометхинг плеасинг
      абоут хис моутх ухен хе спеакс. анд тхере ис сометхинг оф дигниты
      ин хис цоунтенанце тхат уоулд нот гиве оне ан унфавоурабле идеа
      оф хис хеарт. бут, то бе суре, тхе гоод лады ухо схоуед ус хис
      хоусе дид гиве хим а мост фламинг цхарацтер! и цоулд хардлы хелп
      лаугхинг алоуд сометимес. бут хе ис а либерал мастер, и суппосе,
      анд _тхат_ ин тхе еые оф а сервант цомпрехендс еверы виртуе.”

      елизабетх хере фелт херселф цаллед он то саы сометхинг ин
      виндицатион оф хис бехавиоур то уицкхам; анд тхерефоре гаве тхем
      то ундерстанд, ин ас гуардед а маннер ас схе цоулд, тхат бы ухат
      схе хад хеард фром хис релатионс ин кент, хис ацтионс уере
      цапабле оф а веры дифферент цонструцтион; анд тхат хис цхарацтер
      уас бы но меанс со фаулты, нор уицкхам’с со амиабле, ас тхеы хад
      беен цонсидеред ин хертфордсхире. ин цонфирматион оф тхис, схе
      релатед тхе партицуларс оф алл тхе пецуниары трансацтионс ин
      ухицх тхеы хад беен цоннецтед, уитхоут ацтуаллы наминг хер
      аутхориты, бут статинг ит то бе суцх ас мигхт бе релиед он.

      мрс. гардинер уас сурприсед анд цонцернед; бут ас тхеы уере ноу
      аппроацхинг тхе сцене оф хер формер плеасурес, еверы идеа гаве
      уаы то тхе цхарм оф рецоллецтион; анд схе уас тоо муцх енгагед ин
      поинтинг оут то хер хусбанд алл тхе интерестинг спотс ин итс
      енвиронс то тхинк оф анытхинг елсе. фатигуед ас схе хад беен бы
      тхе морнинг’с уалк тхеы хад но соонер динед тхан схе сет офф
      агаин ин кууест оф хер формер ацкууаинтанце, анд тхе евенинг уас
      спент ин тхе сатисфацтионс оф ан интерцоурсе ренеуед афтер маны
      ыеарс’ дисцонтинуанце.

      тхе оццурренцес оф тхе даы уере тоо фулл оф интерест то леаве
      елизабетх муцх аттентион фор аны оф тхесе неу фриендс; анд схе
      цоулд до нотхинг бут тхинк, анд тхинк уитх уондер, оф мр. дарцы’с
      цивилиты, анд, абове алл, оф хис уисхинг хер то бе ацкууаинтед
      уитх хис систер.




      цхаптер 44

      елизабетх хад сеттлед ит тхат мр. дарцы уоулд бринг хис систер то
      висит хер тхе веры даы афтер хер реацхинг пемберлеы; анд уас
      цонсекууентлы ресолвед нот то бе оут оф сигхт оф тхе инн тхе ухоле
      оф тхат морнинг. бут хер цонцлусион уас фалсе; фор он тхе веры
      морнинг афтер тхеир арривал ат ламбтон, тхесе виситорс цаме. тхеы
      хад беен уалкинг абоут тхе плаце уитх соме оф тхеир неу фриендс,
      анд уере жуст ретурнинг то тхе инн то дресс тхемселвес фор дининг
      уитх тхе саме фамилы, ухен тхе соунд оф а царриаге дреу тхем то а
      уиндоу, анд тхеы сау а гентлеман анд а лады ин а цуррицле дривинг
      уп тхе стреет. елизабетх иммедиателы рецогнизинг тхе ливеры,
      гуессед ухат ит меант, анд импартед но смалл дегрее оф хер
      сурприсе то хер релатионс бы ацкууаинтинг тхем уитх тхе хоноур
      ухицх схе експецтед. хер унцле анд аунт уере алл амаземент; анд
      тхе ембаррассмент оф хер маннер ас схе споке, жоинед то тхе
      цирцумстанце итселф, анд маны оф тхе цирцумстанцес оф тхе
      прецединг даы, опенед то тхем а неу идеа он тхе бусинесс. нотхинг
      хад евер суггестед ит бефоре, бут тхеы фелт тхат тхере уас но
      отхер уаы оф аццоунтинг фор суцх аттентионс фром суцх а кууартер
      тхан бы суппосинг а партиалиты фор тхеир ниеце. ухиле тхесе
      неулы-борн нотионс уере пассинг ин тхеир хеадс, тхе пертурбатион
      оф елизабетх’с феелингс уас ат еверы момент инцреасинг. схе уас
      кууите амазед ат хер оун дисцомпосуре; бут амонгст отхер цаусес оф
      дискууиет, схе дреадед лест тхе партиалиты оф тхе бротхер схоулд
      хаве саид тоо муцх ин хер фавоур; анд, море тхан цоммонлы анксиоус
      то плеасе, схе натураллы суспецтед тхат еверы поуер оф плеасинг
      уоулд фаил хер.

      схе ретреатед фром тхе уиндоу, феарфул оф беинг сеен; анд ас схе
      уалкед уп анд доун тхе роом, ендеавоуринг то цомпосе херселф, сау
      суцх лоокс оф инкууиринг сурприсе ин хер унцле анд аунт ас маде
      еверытхинг уорсе.

      мисс дарцы анд хер бротхер аппеаред, анд тхис формидабле
      интродуцтион тоок плаце. уитх астонисхмент дид елизабетх сее тхат
      хер неу ацкууаинтанце уас ат леаст ас муцх ембаррассед ас херселф.
      синце хер беинг ат ламбтон, схе хад хеард тхат мисс дарцы уас
      ексцеединглы проуд; бут тхе обсерватион оф а веры феу минутес
      цонвинцед хер тхат схе уас онлы ексцеединглы схы. схе фоунд ит
      диффицулт то обтаин евен а уорд фром хер беыонд а моносыллабле.

      мисс дарцы уас талл, анд он а ларгер сцале тхан елизабетх; анд,
      тхоугх литтле море тхан сикстеен, хер фигуре уас формед, анд хер
      аппеаранце уоманлы анд грацефул. схе уас лесс хандсоме тхан хер
      бротхер; бут тхере уас сенсе анд гоод хумоур ин хер фаце, анд хер
      маннерс уере перфецтлы унассуминг анд гентле. елизабетх, ухо хад
      експецтед то финд ин хер ас ацуте анд унембаррассед ан обсервер ас
      евер мр. дарцы хад беен, уас муцх релиевед бы дисцернинг суцх
      дифферент феелингс.

      тхеы хад нот лонг беен тогетхер бефоре мр. дарцы толд хер тхат
      бинглеы уас алсо цоминг то уаит он хер; анд схе хад барелы тиме
      то експресс хер сатисфацтион, анд препаре фор суцх а виситор, ухен
      бинглеы’с кууицк степ уас хеард он тхе стаирс, анд ин а момент хе
      ентеред тхе роом. алл елизабетх’с ангер агаинст хим хад беен лонг
      доне ауаы; бут хад схе стилл фелт аны, ит цоулд хардлы хаве стоод
      итс гроунд агаинст тхе унаффецтед цордиалиты уитх ухицх хе
      експрессед химселф он сееинг хер агаин. хе инкууиред ин а фриендлы,
      тхоугх генерал уаы, афтер хер фамилы, анд лоокед анд споке уитх
      тхе саме гоод-хумоуред еасе тхат хе хад евер доне.

      то мр. анд мрс. гардинер хе уас сцарцелы а лесс интерестинг
      персонаге тхан то херселф. тхеы хад лонг уисхед то сее хим. тхе
      ухоле парты бефоре тхем, индеед, ексцитед а ливелы аттентион. тхе
      суспиционс ухицх хад жуст арисен оф мр. дарцы анд тхеир ниеце
      дирецтед тхеир обсерватион тоуардс еацх уитх ан еарнест тхоугх
      гуардед инкууиры; анд тхеы соон дреу фром тхосе инкууириес тхе фулл
      цонвицтион тхат оне оф тхем ат леаст кнеу ухат ит уас то лове. оф
      тхе лады’с сенсатионс тхеы ремаинед а литтле ин доубт; бут тхат
      тхе гентлеман уас оверфлоуинг уитх адмиратион уас евидент еноугх.

      елизабетх, он хер сиде, хад муцх то до. схе уантед то асцертаин
      тхе феелингс оф еацх оф хер виситорс; схе уантед то цомпосе хер
      оун, анд то маке херселф агрееабле то алл; анд ин тхе латтер
      обжецт, ухере схе феаред мост то фаил, схе уас мост суре оф
      суццесс, фор тхосе то ухом схе ендеавоуред то гиве плеасуре уере
      препоссессед ин хер фавоур. бинглеы уас реады, георгиана уас
      еагер, анд дарцы детерминед, то бе плеасед.

      ин сееинг бинглеы, хер тхоугхтс натураллы флеу то хер систер;
      анд, ох! хоу ардентлы дид схе лонг то кноу ухетхер аны оф хис
      уере дирецтед ин а лике маннер. сометимес схе цоулд фанцы тхат хе
      талкед лесс тхан он формер оццасионс, анд онце ор туице плеасед
      херселф уитх тхе нотион тхат, ас хе лоокед ат хер, хе уас трыинг
      то траце а ресембланце. бут, тхоугх тхис мигхт бе имагинары, схе
      цоулд нот бе децеивед ас то хис бехавиоур то мисс дарцы, ухо хад
      беен сет уп ас а ривал то жане. но лоок аппеаред он еитхер сиде
      тхат споке партицулар регард. нотхинг оццурред бетуеен тхем тхат
      цоулд жустифы тхе хопес оф хис систер. он тхис поинт схе уас соон
      сатисфиед; анд туо ор тхрее литтле цирцумстанцес оццурред ере
      тхеы партед, ухицх, ин хер анксиоус интерпретатион, денотед а
      рецоллецтион оф жане нот унтинцтуред бы тендернесс, анд а уисх оф
      саыинг море тхат мигхт леад то тхе ментион оф хер, хад хе даред.
      хе обсервед то хер, ат а момент ухен тхе отхерс уере талкинг
      тогетхер, анд ин а тоне ухицх хад сометхинг оф реал регрет, тхат
      ит “уас а веры лонг тиме синце хе хад хад тхе плеасуре оф сееинг
      хер;” анд, бефоре схе цоулд реплы, хе аддед, “ит ис абове еигхт
      монтхс. уе хаве нот мет синце тхе 26тх оф новембер, ухен уе уере
      алл данцинг тогетхер ат нетхерфиелд.”

      елизабетх уас плеасед то финд хис меморы со ексацт; анд хе
      афтеруардс тоок оццасион то аск хер, ухен унаттендед то бы аны оф
      тхе рест, ухетхер _алл_ хер систерс уере ат лонгбоурн. тхере уас
      нот муцх ин тхе кууестион, нор ин тхе прецединг ремарк; бут тхере
      уас а лоок анд а маннер ухицх гаве тхем меанинг.

      ит уас нот офтен тхат схе цоулд турн хер еыес он мр. дарцы
      химселф; бут, ухеневер схе дид цатцх а глимпсе, схе сау ан
      експрессион оф генерал цомплаисанце, анд ин алл тхат хе саид схе
      хеард ан аццент со ремовед фром _хаутеур_ ор дисдаин оф хис
      цомпанионс, ас цонвинцед хер тхат тхе импровемент оф маннерс
      ухицх схе хад ыестердаы уитнессед хоуевер темпорары итс ексистенце
      мигхт прове, хад ат леаст оутливед оне даы. ухен схе сау хим тхус
      сеекинг тхе ацкууаинтанце анд цоуртинг тхе гоод опинион оф пеопле
      уитх ухом аны интерцоурсе а феу монтхс аго уоулд хаве беен а
      дисграце—ухен схе сау хим тхус цивил, нот онлы то херселф, бут то
      тхе веры релатионс ухом хе хад опенлы дисдаинед, анд рецоллецтед
      тхеир ласт ливелы сцене ин хунсфорд парсонаге—тхе дифференце, тхе
      цханге уас со греат, анд струцк со форциблы он хер минд, тхат схе
      цоулд хардлы рестраин хер астонисхмент фром беинг висибле. невер,
      евен ин тхе цомпаны оф хис деар фриендс ат нетхерфиелд, ор хис
      дигнифиед релатионс ат росингс, хад схе сеен хим со десироус то
      плеасе, со фрее фром селф-цонсекууенце ор унбендинг ресерве, ас
      ноу, ухен но импортанце цоулд ресулт фром тхе суццесс оф хис
      ендеавоурс, анд ухен евен тхе ацкууаинтанце оф тхосе то ухом хис
      аттентионс уере аддрессед уоулд драу доун тхе ридицуле анд
      ценсуре оф тхе ладиес ботх оф нетхерфиелд анд росингс.

      тхеир виситорс стаыед уитх тхем абове халф-ан-хоур; анд ухен тхеы
      аросе то департ, мр. дарцы цаллед он хис систер то жоин хим ин
      експрессинг тхеир уисх оф сееинг мр. анд мрс. гардинер, анд мисс
      беннет, то диннер ат пемберлеы, бефоре тхеы лефт тхе цоунтры.
      мисс дарцы, тхоугх уитх а диффиденце ухицх маркед хер литтле ин
      тхе хабит оф гивинг инвитатионс, реадилы обеыед. мрс. гардинер
      лоокед ат хер ниеце, десироус оф кноуинг хоу _схе_, ухом тхе
      инвитатион мост цонцернед, фелт диспосед ас то итс аццептанце,
      бут елизабетх хад турнед ауаы хер хеад. пресуминг хоуевер, тхат
      тхис студиед авоиданце споке ратхер а моментары ембаррассмент
      тхан аны дислике оф тхе пропосал, анд сееинг ин хер хусбанд, ухо
      уас фонд оф социеты, а перфецт уиллингнесс то аццепт ит, схе
      вентуред то енгаге фор хер аттенданце, анд тхе даы афтер тхе некст
      уас фиксед он.

      бинглеы експрессед греат плеасуре ин тхе цертаинты оф сееинг
      елизабетх агаин, хавинг стилл а греат деал то саы то хер, анд
      маны инкууириес то маке афтер алл тхеир хертфордсхире фриендс.
      елизабетх, цонструинг алл тхис инто а уисх оф хеаринг хер спеак
      оф хер систер, уас плеасед, анд он тхис аццоунт, ас уелл ас соме
      отхерс, фоунд херселф, ухен тхеир виситорс лефт тхем, цапабле оф
      цонсидеринг тхе ласт халф-хоур уитх соме сатисфацтион, тхоугх
      ухиле ит уас пассинг, тхе енжоымент оф ит хад беен литтле. еагер
      то бе алоне, анд феарфул оф инкууириес ор хинтс фром хер унцле анд
      аунт, схе стаыед уитх тхем онлы лонг еноугх то хеар тхеир
      фавоурабле опинион оф бинглеы, анд тхен хурриед ауаы то дресс.

      бут схе хад но реасон то феар мр. анд мрс. гардинер’с цуриоситы;
      ит уас нот тхеир уисх то форце хер цоммуницатион. ит уас евидент
      тхат схе уас муцх беттер ацкууаинтед уитх мр. дарцы тхан тхеы хад
      бефоре аны идеа оф; ит уас евидент тхат хе уас веры муцх ин лове
      уитх хер. тхеы сау муцх то интерест, бут нотхинг то жустифы
      инкууиры.

      оф мр. дарцы ит уас ноу а маттер оф анксиеты то тхинк уелл; анд,
      ас фар ас тхеир ацкууаинтанце реацхед, тхере уас но фаулт то финд.
      тхеы цоулд нот бе унтоуцхед бы хис политенесс; анд хад тхеы драун
      хис цхарацтер фром тхеир оун феелингс анд хис сервант’с репорт,
      уитхоут аны референце то аны отхер аццоунт, тхе цирцле ин
      хертфордсхире то ухицх хе уас кноун уоулд нот хаве рецогнизед ит
      фор мр. дарцы. тхере уас ноу ан интерест, хоуевер, ин белиевинг
      тхе хоусекеепер; анд тхеы соон бецаме сенсибле тхат тхе аутхориты
      оф а сервант ухо хад кноун хим синце хе уас фоур ыеарс олд, анд
      ухосе оун маннерс индицатед респецтабилиты, уас нот то бе хастилы
      режецтед. неитхер хад анытхинг оццурред ин тхе интеллигенце оф
      тхеир ламбтон фриендс тхат цоулд материаллы лессен итс уеигхт.
      тхеы хад нотхинг то аццусе хим оф бут приде; приде хе пробаблы
      хад, анд иф нот, ит уоулд цертаинлы бе импутед бы тхе инхабитантс
      оф а смалл маркет-тоун ухере тхе фамилы дид нот висит. ит уас
      ацкноуледгед, хоуевер, тхат хе уас а либерал ман, анд дид муцх
      гоод амонг тхе поор.

      уитх респецт то уицкхам, тхе травеллерс соон фоунд тхат хе уас
      нот хелд тхере ин муцх естиматион; фор тхоугх тхе цхиеф оф хис
      цонцернс уитх тхе сон оф хис патрон уере имперфецтлы ундерстоод,
      ит уас ыет а уелл-кноун фацт тхат, он хис кууиттинг дербысхире, хе
      хад лефт маны дебтс бехинд хим, ухицх мр. дарцы афтеруардс
      дисцхаргед.

      ас фор елизабетх, хер тхоугхтс уере ат пемберлеы тхис евенинг
      море тхан тхе ласт; анд тхе евенинг, тхоугх ас ит пассед ит
      сеемед лонг, уас нот лонг еноугх то детермине хер феелингс
      тоуардс _оне_ ин тхат мансион; анд схе лаы ауаке туо ухоле хоурс
      ендеавоуринг то маке тхем оут. схе цертаинлы дид нот хате хим.
      но; хатред хад ванисхед лонг аго, анд схе хад алмост ас лонг беен
      асхамед оф евер феелинг а дислике агаинст хим, тхат цоулд бе со
      цаллед. тхе респецт цреатед бы тхе цонвицтион оф хис валуабле
      кууалитиес, тхоугх ат фирст унуиллинглы адмиттед, хад фор соме
      тиме цеасед то бе репугнант то хер феелинг; анд ит уас ноу
      хеигхтенед инто сомеухат оф а фриендлиер натуре, бы тхе тестимоны
      со хигхлы ин хис фавоур, анд брингинг форуард хис диспоситион ин
      со амиабле а лигхт, ухицх ыестердаы хад продуцед. бут абове алл,
      абове респецт анд естеем, тхере уас а мотиве уитхин хер оф
      гоодуилл ухицх цоулд нот бе оверлоокед. ит уас гратитуде;
      гратитуде, нот мерелы фор хавинг онце ловед хер, бут фор ловинг
      хер стилл уелл еноугх то форгиве алл тхе петуланце анд ацримоны
      оф хер маннер ин режецтинг хим, анд алл тхе унжуст аццусатионс
      аццомпаныинг хер режецтион. хе ухо, схе хад беен персуадед, уоулд
      авоид хер ас хис греатест енемы, сеемед, он тхис аццидентал
      меетинг, мост еагер то пресерве тхе ацкууаинтанце, анд уитхоут аны
      инделицате дисплаы оф регард, ор аны пецулиариты оф маннер, ухере
      тхеир туо селвес онлы уере цонцернед, уас солицитинг тхе гоод
      опинион оф хер фриендс, анд бент он макинг хер кноун то хис
      систер. суцх а цханге ин а ман оф со муцх приде ексцитинг нот онлы
      астонисхмент бут гратитуде—фор то лове, ардент лове, ит муст бе
      аттрибутед; анд ас суцх итс импрессион он хер уас оф а сорт то бе
      енцоурагед, ас бы но меанс унплеасинг, тхоугх ит цоулд нот бе
      ексацтлы дефинед. схе респецтед, схе естеемед, схе уас гратефул то
      хим, схе фелт а реал интерест ин хис уелфаре; анд схе онлы уантед
      то кноу хоу фар схе уисхед тхат уелфаре то депенд упон херселф,
      анд хоу фар ит уоулд бе фор тхе хаппинесс оф ботх тхат схе схоулд
      емплоы тхе поуер, ухицх хер фанцы толд хер схе стилл поссессед,
      оф брингинг он хер тхе ренеуал оф хис аддрессес.

      ит хад беен сеттлед ин тхе евенинг бетуеен тхе аунт анд тхе
      ниеце, тхат суцх а стрикинг цивилиты ас мисс дарцы’с ин цоминг то
      сее тхем он тхе веры даы оф хер арривал ат пемберлеы, фор схе хад
      реацхед ит онлы то а лате бреакфаст, оугхт то бе имитатед, тхоугх
      ит цоулд нот бе екууаллед, бы соме ексертион оф политенесс он тхеир
      сиде; анд, цонсекууентлы, тхат ит уоулд бе хигхлы експедиент то
      уаит он хер ат пемберлеы тхе фоллоуинг морнинг. тхеы уере,
      тхерефоре, то го. елизабетх уас плеасед; тхоугх ухен схе аскед
      херселф тхе реасон, схе хад веры литтле то саы ин реплы.

      мр. гардинер лефт тхем соон афтер бреакфаст. тхе фисхинг сцхеме
      хад беен ренеуед тхе даы бефоре, анд а поситиве енгагемент маде
      оф хис меетинг соме оф тхе гентлемен ат пемберлеы бефоре ноон.




      цхаптер 45

      цонвинцед ас елизабетх ноу уас тхат мисс бинглеы’с дислике оф хер
      хад оригинатед ин жеалоусы, схе цоулд нот хелп феелинг хоу
      унуелцоме хер аппеаранце ат пемберлеы муст бе то хер, анд уас
      цуриоус то кноу уитх хоу муцх цивилиты он тхат лады’с сиде тхе
      ацкууаинтанце уоулд ноу бе ренеуед.

      он реацхинг тхе хоусе, тхеы уере схоун тхроугх тхе халл инто тхе
      салоон, ухосе нортхерн аспецт рендеред ит делигхтфул фор суммер.
      итс уиндоус опенинг то тхе гроунд, адмиттед а мост рефресхинг
      виеу оф тхе хигх уооды хиллс бехинд тхе хоусе, анд оф тхе
      беаутифул оакс анд спанисх цхестнутс ухицх уере сцаттеред овер
      тхе интермедиате лаун.

      ин тхис хоусе тхеы уере рецеивед бы мисс дарцы, ухо уас ситтинг
      тхере уитх мрс. хурст анд мисс бинглеы, анд тхе лады уитх ухом
      схе ливед ин лондон. георгиана’с рецептион оф тхем уас веры
      цивил, бут аттендед уитх алл тхе ембаррассмент ухицх, тхоугх
      процеединг фром схынесс анд тхе феар оф доинг уронг, уоулд еасилы
      гиве то тхосе ухо фелт тхемселвес инфериор тхе белиеф оф хер
      беинг проуд анд ресервед. мрс. гардинер анд хер ниеце, хоуевер,
      дид хер жустице, анд питиед хер.

      бы мрс. хурст анд мисс бинглеы тхеы уере нотицед онлы бы а
      цуртсеы; анд, он тхеир беинг сеатед, а паусе, аукуард ас суцх
      паусес муст алуаыс бе, суццеедед фор а феу моментс. ит уас фирст
      брокен бы мрс. аннеслеы, а гентеел, агрееабле-лоокинг уоман,
      ухосе ендеавоур то интродуце соме кинд оф дисцоурсе провед хер то
      бе море трулы уелл-бред тхан еитхер оф тхе отхерс; анд бетуеен
      хер анд мрс. гардинер, уитх оццасионал хелп фром елизабетх, тхе
      цонверсатион уас царриед он. мисс дарцы лоокед ас иф схе уисхед
      фор цоураге еноугх то жоин ин ит; анд сометимес дид вентуре а
      схорт сентенце ухен тхере уас леаст дангер оф итс беинг хеард.

      елизабетх соон сау тхат схе уас херселф цлоселы уатцхед бы мисс
      бинглеы, анд тхат схе цоулд нот спеак а уорд, еспециаллы то мисс
      дарцы, уитхоут цаллинг хер аттентион. тхис обсерватион уоулд нот
      хаве превентед хер фром трыинг то талк то тхе латтер, хад тхеы
      нот беен сеатед ат ан инцонвениент дистанце; бут схе уас нот
      сорры то бе спаред тхе нецесситы оф саыинг муцх. хер оун тхоугхтс
      уере емплоыинг хер. схе експецтед еверы момент тхат соме оф тхе
      гентлемен уоулд ентер тхе роом. схе уисхед, схе феаред тхат тхе
      мастер оф тхе хоусе мигхт бе амонгст тхем; анд ухетхер схе уисхед
      ор феаред ит мост, схе цоулд сцарцелы детермине. афтер ситтинг ин
      тхис маннер а кууартер оф ан хоур уитхоут хеаринг мисс бинглеы’с
      воице, елизабетх уас роусед бы рецеивинг фром хер а цолд инкууиры
      афтер тхе хеалтх оф хер фамилы. схе ансуеред уитх екууал
      индифференце анд бревиты, анд тхе отхер саид но море.

      тхе некст вариатион ухицх тхеир висит аффордед уас продуцед бы тхе
      ентранце оф сервантс уитх цолд меат, цаке, анд а вариеты оф алл
      тхе финест фруитс ин сеасон; бут тхис дид нот таке плаце тилл
      афтер маны а сигнифицант лоок анд смиле фром мрс. аннеслеы то
      мисс дарцы хад беен гивен, то реминд хер оф хер пост. тхере уас
      ноу емплоымент фор тхе ухоле парты—фор тхоугх тхеы цоулд нот алл
      талк, тхеы цоулд алл еат; анд тхе беаутифул пырамидс оф грапес,
      нецтаринес, анд пеацхес соон цоллецтед тхем роунд тхе табле.

      ухиле тхус енгагед, елизабетх хад а фаир оппортуниты оф децидинг
      ухетхер схе мост феаред ор уисхед фор тхе аппеаранце оф мр.
      дарцы, бы тхе феелингс ухицх преваилед он хис ентеринг тхе роом;
      анд тхен, тхоугх бут а момент бефоре схе хад белиевед хер уисхес
      то предоминате, схе беган то регрет тхат хе цаме.

      хе хад беен соме тиме уитх мр. гардинер, ухо, уитх туо ор тхрее
      отхер гентлемен фром тхе хоусе, уас енгагед бы тхе ривер, анд хад
      лефт хим онлы он леарнинг тхат тхе ладиес оф тхе фамилы интендед
      а висит то георгиана тхат морнинг. но соонер дид хе аппеар тхан
      елизабетх уиселы ресолвед то бе перфецтлы еасы анд унембаррассед;
      а ресолутион тхе море нецессары то бе маде, бут перхапс нот тхе
      море еасилы кепт, бецаусе схе сау тхат тхе суспиционс оф тхе
      ухоле парты уере ауакенед агаинст тхем, анд тхат тхере уас
      сцарцелы ан еые ухицх дид нот уатцх хис бехавиоур ухен хе фирст
      цаме инто тхе роом. ин но цоунтенанце уас аттентиве цуриоситы со
      стронглы маркед ас ин мисс бинглеы’с, ин спите оф тхе смилес
      ухицх оверспреад хер фаце ухеневер схе споке то оне оф итс
      обжецтс; фор жеалоусы хад нот ыет маде хер десперате, анд хер
      аттентионс то мр. дарцы уере бы но меанс овер. мисс дарцы, он хер
      бротхер’с ентранце, ексертед херселф муцх море то талк, анд
      елизабетх сау тхат хе уас анксиоус фор хис систер анд херселф то
      гет ацкууаинтед, анд форуардед ас муцх ас поссибле, еверы аттемпт
      ат цонверсатион он еитхер сиде. мисс бинглеы сау алл тхис
      ликеуисе; анд, ин тхе импруденце оф ангер, тоок тхе фирст
      оппортуниты оф саыинг, уитх снееринг цивилиты:

      “праы, мисс елиза, аре нот тхе ——схире милитиа ремовед фром
      мерытон? тхеы муст бе а греат лосс то _ыоур_ фамилы.”

      ин дарцы’с пресенце схе даред нот ментион уицкхам’с наме; бут
      елизабетх инстантлы цомпрехендед тхат хе уас уппермост ин хер
      тхоугхтс; анд тхе вариоус рецоллецтионс цоннецтед уитх хим гаве
      хер а момент’с дистресс; бут ексертинг херселф вигороуслы то репел
      тхе илл-натуред аттацк, схе пресентлы ансуеред тхе кууестион ин а
      толераблы детацхед тоне. ухиле схе споке, ан инволунтары гланце
      схоуед хер дарцы, уитх а хеигхтенед цомплексион, еарнестлы лоокинг
      ат хер, анд хис систер оверцоме уитх цонфусион, анд унабле то
      лифт уп хер еыес. хад мисс бинглеы кноун ухат паин схе уас тхен
      гивинг хер беловед фриенд, схе ундоубтедлы уоулд хаве рефраинед
      фром тхе хинт; бут схе хад мерелы интендед то дисцомпосе
      елизабетх бы брингинг форуард тхе идеа оф а ман то ухом схе
      белиевед хер партиал, то маке хер бетраы а сенсибилиты ухицх
      мигхт инжуре хер ин дарцы’с опинион, анд, перхапс, то реминд тхе
      латтер оф алл тхе фоллиес анд абсурдитиес бы ухицх соме парт оф
      хер фамилы уере цоннецтед уитх тхат цорпс. нот а сыллабле хад
      евер реацхед хер оф мисс дарцы’с медитатед елопемент. то но
      цреатуре хад ит беен ревеалед, ухере сецрецы уас поссибле, ексцепт
      то елизабетх; анд фром алл бинглеы’с цоннецтионс хер бротхер уас
      партицуларлы анксиоус то цонцеал ит, фром тхе веры уисх ухицх
      елизабетх хад лонг аго аттрибутед то хим, оф тхеир бецоминг
      хереафтер хер оун. хе хад цертаинлы формед суцх а план, анд
      уитхоут меанинг тхат ит схоулд аффецт хис ендеавоур то сепарате
      хим фром мисс беннет, ит ис пробабле тхат ит мигхт адд сометхинг
      то хис ливелы цонцерн фор тхе уелфаре оф хис фриенд.

      елизабетх’с цоллецтед бехавиоур, хоуевер, соон кууиетед хис
      емотион; анд ас мисс бинглеы, вексед анд дисаппоинтед, даред нот
      аппроацх неарер то уицкхам, георгиана алсо рецоверед ин тиме,
      тхоугх нот еноугх то бе абле то спеак аны море. хер бротхер,
      ухосе еые схе феаред то меет, сцарцелы рецоллецтед хер интерест
      ин тхе аффаир, анд тхе веры цирцумстанце ухицх хад беен десигнед
      то турн хис тхоугхтс фром елизабетх сеемед то хаве фиксед тхем он
      хер море анд море цхеерфуллы.

      тхеир висит дид нот цонтинуе лонг афтер тхе кууестион анд ансуер
      абове ментионед; анд ухиле мр. дарцы уас аттендинг тхем то тхеир
      царриаге мисс бинглеы уас вентинг хер феелингс ин цритицисмс он
      елизабетх’с персон, бехавиоур, анд дресс. бут георгиана уоулд нот
      жоин хер. хер бротхер’с рецоммендатион уас еноугх то енсуре хер
      фавоур; хис жудгемент цоулд нот ерр. анд хе хад спокен ин суцх
      термс оф елизабетх ас то леаве георгиана уитхоут тхе поуер оф
      финдинг хер отхеруисе тхан ловелы анд амиабле. ухен дарцы
      ретурнед то тхе салоон, мисс бинглеы цоулд нот хелп репеатинг то
      хим соме парт оф ухат схе хад беен саыинг то хис систер.

      “хоу веры илл мисс елиза беннет лоокс тхис морнинг, мр. дарцы,”
      схе цриед; “и невер ин мы лифе сау аныоне со муцх алтеред ас схе
      ис синце тхе уинтер. схе ис гроун со броун анд цоарсе! лоуиса анд
      и уере агрееинг тхат уе схоулд нот хаве кноун хер агаин.”

      хоуевер литтле мр. дарцы мигхт хаве ликед суцх ан аддресс, хе
      цонтентед химселф уитх цооллы реплыинг тхат хе перцеивед но отхер
      алтератион тхан хер беинг ратхер таннед, но мирацулоус
      цонсекууенце оф травеллинг ин тхе суммер.

      “фор мы оун парт,” схе режоинед, “и муст цонфесс тхат и невер
      цоулд сее аны беауты ин хер. хер фаце ис тоо тхин; хер цомплексион
      хас но бриллианцы; анд хер феатурес аре нот ат алл хандсоме. хер
      носе уантс цхарацтер—тхере ис нотхинг маркед ин итс линес. хер
      теетх аре толерабле, бут нот оут оф тхе цоммон уаы; анд ас фор
      хер еыес, ухицх хаве сометимес беен цаллед со фине, и цоулд невер
      сее анытхинг екстраординары ин тхем. тхеы хаве а схарп, схреуисх
      лоок, ухицх и до нот лике ат алл; анд ин хер аир алтогетхер тхере
      ис а селф-суффициенцы уитхоут фасхион, ухицх ис интолерабле.”

      персуадед ас мисс бинглеы уас тхат дарцы адмиред елизабетх, тхис
      уас нот тхе бест метход оф рецоммендинг херселф; бут ангры пеопле
      аре нот алуаыс уисе; анд ин сееинг хим ат ласт лоок сомеухат
      неттлед, схе хад алл тхе суццесс схе експецтед. хе уас ресолутелы
      силент, хоуевер, анд, фром а детерминатион оф макинг хим спеак,
      схе цонтинуед:

      “и ремембер, ухен уе фирст кнеу хер ин хертфордсхире, хоу амазед
      уе алл уере то финд тхат схе уас а репутед беауты; анд и
      партицуларлы рецоллецт ыоур саыинг оне нигхт, афтер тхеы хад беен
      дининг ат нетхерфиелд, ‘_схе_ а беауты!—и схоулд ас соон цалл хер
      мотхер а уит.’ бут афтеруардс схе сеемед то импрове он ыоу, анд и
      белиеве ыоу тхоугхт хер ратхер претты ат оне тиме.”

      “ыес,” реплиед дарцы, ухо цоулд цонтаин химселф но лонгер, “бут
      _тхат_ уас онлы ухен и фирст сау хер, фор ит ис маны монтхс синце
      и хаве цонсидеред хер ас оне оф тхе хандсомест уомен оф мы
      ацкууаинтанце.”

      хе тхен уент ауаы, анд мисс бинглеы уас лефт то алл тхе
      сатисфацтион оф хавинг форцед хим то саы ухат гаве но оне аны
      паин бут херселф.

      мрс. гардинер анд елизабетх талкед оф алл тхат хад оццурред
      дуринг тхеир висит, ас тхеы ретурнед, ексцепт ухат хад
      партицуларлы интерестед тхем ботх. тхе лоок анд бехавиоур оф
      еверыбоды тхеы хад сеен уере дисцуссед, ексцепт оф тхе персон ухо
      хад мостлы енгагед тхеир аттентион. тхеы талкед оф хис систер,
      хис фриендс, хис хоусе, хис фруит—оф еверытхинг бут химселф; ыет
      елизабетх уас лонгинг то кноу ухат мрс. гардинер тхоугхт оф хим,
      анд мрс. гардинер уоулд хаве беен хигхлы гратифиед бы хер ниеце’с
      бегиннинг тхе субжецт.




      цхаптер 46

      елизабетх хад беен а гоод деал дисаппоинтед ин нот финдинг а
      леттер фром жане он тхеир фирст арривал ат ламбтон; анд тхис
      дисаппоинтмент хад беен ренеуед он еацх оф тхе морнингс тхат хад
      ноу беен спент тхере; бут он тхе тхирд хер репининг уас овер, анд
      хер систер жустифиед, бы тхе рецеипт оф туо леттерс фром хер ат
      онце, он оне оф ухицх уас маркед тхат ит хад беен миссент
      елсеухере. елизабетх уас нот сурприсед ат ит, ас жане хад уриттен
      тхе дирецтион ремаркаблы илл.

      тхеы хад жуст беен препаринг то уалк ас тхе леттерс цаме ин; анд
      хер унцле анд аунт, леавинг хер то енжоы тхем ин кууиет, сет офф
      бы тхемселвес. тхе оне миссент муст фирст бе аттендед то; ит хад
      беен уриттен фиве даыс аго. тхе бегиннинг цонтаинед ан аццоунт оф
      алл тхеир литтле партиес анд енгагементс, уитх суцх неус ас тхе
      цоунтры аффордед; бут тхе латтер халф, ухицх уас датед а даы
      латер, анд уриттен ин евидент агитатион, гаве море импортант
      интеллигенце. ит уас то тхис еффецт:

      “синце уритинг тхе абове, деарест лиззы, сометхинг хас оццурред
      оф а мост унекспецтед анд сериоус натуре; бут и ам афраид оф
      аларминг ыоу—бе ассуред тхат уе аре алл уелл. ухат и хаве то саы
      релатес то поор лыдиа. ан експресс цаме ат туелве ласт нигхт, жуст
      ас уе уере алл гоне то бед, фром цолонел форстер, то информ ус
      тхат схе уас гоне офф то сцотланд уитх оне оф хис оффицерс; то
      оун тхе трутх, уитх уицкхам! имагине оур сурприсе. то китты,
      хоуевер, ит доес нот сеем со ухоллы унекспецтед. и ам веры, веры
      сорры. со импрудент а матцх он ботх сидес! бут и ам уиллинг то
      хопе тхе бест, анд тхат хис цхарацтер хас беен мисундерстоод.
      тхоугхтлесс анд индисцреет и цан еасилы белиеве хим, бут тхис
      степ (анд лет ус режоице овер ит) маркс нотхинг бад ат хеарт. хис
      цхоице ис дисинтерестед ат леаст, фор хе муст кноу мы фатхер цан
      гиве хер нотхинг. оур поор мотхер ис садлы гриевед. мы фатхер
      беарс ит беттер. хоу тханкфул ам и тхат уе невер лет тхем кноу
      ухат хас беен саид агаинст хим; уе муст форгет ит оурселвес. тхеы
      уере офф сатурдаы нигхт абоут туелве, ас ис цонжецтуред, бут уере
      нот миссед тилл ыестердаы морнинг ат еигхт. тхе експресс уас сент
      офф дирецтлы. мы деар лиззы, тхеы муст хаве пассед уитхин тен
      милес оф ус. цолонел форстер гивес ус реасон то експецт хим хере
      соон. лыдиа лефт а феу линес фор хис уифе, информинг хер оф тхеир
      интентион. и муст цонцлуде, фор и цаннот бе лонг фром мы поор
      мотхер. и ам афраид ыоу уилл нот бе абле то маке ит оут, бут и
      хардлы кноу ухат и хаве уриттен.”

      уитхоут аллоуинг херселф тиме фор цонсидератион, анд сцарцелы
      кноуинг ухат схе фелт, елизабетх он финисхинг тхис леттер
      инстантлы сеизед тхе отхер, анд опенинг ит уитх тхе утмост
      импатиенце, реад ас фоллоус: ит хад беен уриттен а даы латер тхан
      тхе цонцлусион оф тхе фирст.

      “бы тхис тиме, мы деарест систер, ыоу хаве рецеивед мы хурриед
      леттер; и уисх тхис маы бе море интеллигибле, бут тхоугх нот
      цонфинед фор тиме, мы хеад ис со беуилдеред тхат и цаннот ансуер
      фор беинг цохерент. деарест лиззы, и хардлы кноу ухат и уоулд
      урите, бут и хаве бад неус фор ыоу, анд ит цаннот бе делаыед.
      импрудент ас тхе марриаге бетуеен мр. уицкхам анд оур поор лыдиа
      уоулд бе, уе аре ноу анксиоус то бе ассуред ит хас такен плаце,
      фор тхере ис бут тоо муцх реасон то феар тхеы аре нот гоне то
      сцотланд. цолонел форстер цаме ыестердаы, хавинг лефт бригхтон
      тхе даы бефоре, нот маны хоурс афтер тхе експресс. тхоугх лыдиа’с
      схорт леттер то мрс. ф. гаве тхем то ундерстанд тхат тхеы уере
      гоинг то гретна греен, сометхинг уас дроппед бы денны експрессинг
      хис белиеф тхат у. невер интендед то го тхере, ор то марры лыдиа
      ат алл, ухицх уас репеатед то цолонел ф., ухо, инстантлы такинг
      тхе аларм, сет офф фром б. интендинг то траце тхеир роуте. хе дид
      траце тхем еасилы то цлапхам, бут но фуртхер; фор он ентеринг
      тхат плаце, тхеы ремовед инто а хацкнеы цоацх, анд дисмиссед тхе
      цхаисе тхат броугхт тхем фром епсом. алл тхат ис кноун афтер тхис
      ис, тхат тхеы уере сеен то цонтинуе тхе лондон роад. и кноу нот
      ухат то тхинк. афтер макинг еверы поссибле инкууиры он тхат сиде
      лондон, цолонел ф. цаме он инто хертфордсхире, анксиоуслы ренеуинг
      тхем ат алл тхе турнпикес, анд ат тхе иннс ин барнет анд
      хатфиелд, бут уитхоут аны суццесс—но суцх пеопле хад беен сеен то
      пасс тхроугх. уитх тхе киндест цонцерн хе цаме он то лонгбоурн,
      анд броке хис аппрехенсионс то ус ин а маннер мост цредитабле то
      хис хеарт. и ам синцерелы гриевед фор хим анд мрс. ф., бут но оне
      цан тхроу аны бламе он тхем. оур дистресс, мы деар лиззы, ис веры
      греат. мы фатхер анд мотхер белиеве тхе уорст, бут и цаннот тхинк
      со илл оф хим. маны цирцумстанцес мигхт маке ит море елигибле фор
      тхем то бе марриед привателы ин тоун тхан то пурсуе тхеир фирст
      план; анд евен иф _хе_ цоулд форм суцх а десигн агаинст а ыоунг
      уоман оф лыдиа’с цоннецтионс, ухицх ис нот ликелы, цан и суппосе
      хер со лост то еверытхинг? импоссибле! и гриеве то финд, хоуевер,
      тхат цолонел ф. ис нот диспосед то депенд упон тхеир марриаге; хе
      схоок хис хеад ухен и експрессед мы хопес, анд саид хе феаред у.
      уас нот а ман то бе трустед. мы поор мотхер ис реаллы илл, анд
      кеепс хер роом. цоулд схе ексерт херселф, ит уоулд бе беттер; бут
      тхис ис нот то бе експецтед. анд ас то мы фатхер, и невер ин мы
      лифе сау хим со аффецтед. поор китты хас ангер фор хавинг
      цонцеалед тхеир аттацхмент; бут ас ит уас а маттер оф цонфиденце,
      оне цаннот уондер. и ам трулы глад, деарест лиззы, тхат ыоу хаве
      беен спаред сометхинг оф тхесе дистрессинг сценес; бут ноу, ас
      тхе фирст схоцк ис овер, схалл и оун тхат и лонг фор ыоур ретурн?
      и ам нот со селфисх, хоуевер, ас то пресс фор ит, иф
      инцонвениент. адиеу! и таке уп мы пен агаин то до ухат и хаве
      жуст толд ыоу и уоулд нот; бут цирцумстанцес аре суцх тхат и
      цаннот хелп еарнестлы беггинг ыоу алл то цоме хере ас соон ас
      поссибле. и кноу мы деар унцле анд аунт со уелл, тхат и ам нот
      афраид оф рекууестинг ит, тхоугх и хаве стилл сометхинг море то
      аск оф тхе формер. мы фатхер ис гоинг то лондон уитх цолонел
      форстер инстантлы, то тры то дисцовер хер. ухат хе меанс то до и
      ам суре и кноу нот; бут хис ексцессиве дистресс уилл нот аллоу хим
      то пурсуе аны меасуре ин тхе бест анд сафест уаы, анд цолонел
      форстер ис облигед то бе ат бригхтон агаин то-морроу евенинг. ин
      суцх ан ексигенце, мы унцле’с адвице анд ассистанце уоулд бе
      еверытхинг ин тхе уорлд; хе уилл иммедиателы цомпрехенд ухат и
      муст феел, анд и релы упон хис гооднесс.”

      “ох! ухере, ухере ис мы унцле?” цриед елизабетх, дартинг фром хер
      сеат ас схе финисхед тхе леттер, ин еагернесс то фоллоу хим,
      уитхоут лосинг а момент оф тхе тиме со прециоус; бут ас схе
      реацхед тхе доор ит уас опенед бы а сервант, анд мр. дарцы
      аппеаред. хер пале фаце анд импетуоус маннер маде хим старт, анд
      бефоре хе цоулд рецовер химселф то спеак, схе, ин ухосе минд
      еверы идеа уас суперседед бы лыдиа’с ситуатион, хастилы
      ексцлаимед, “и бег ыоур пардон, бут и муст леаве ыоу. и муст финд
      мр. гардинер тхис момент, он бусинесс тхат цаннот бе делаыед; и
      хаве нот ан инстант то лосе.”

      “гоод год! ухат ис тхе маттер?” цриед хе, уитх море феелинг тхан
      политенесс; тхен рецоллецтинг химселф, “и уилл нот детаин ыоу а
      минуте; бут лет ме, ор лет тхе сервант го афтер мр. анд мрс.
      гардинер. ыоу аре нот уелл еноугх; ыоу цаннот го ыоурселф.”

      елизабетх хеситатед, бут хер кнеес тремблед ундер хер анд схе
      фелт хоу литтле уоулд бе гаинед бы хер аттемптинг то пурсуе тхем.
      цаллинг бацк тхе сервант, тхерефоре, схе цоммиссионед хим, тхоугх
      ин со бреатхлесс ан аццент ас маде хер алмост унинтеллигибле, то
      фетцх хис мастер анд мистресс хоме инстантлы.

      он хис кууиттинг тхе роом схе сат доун, унабле то суппорт херселф,
      анд лоокинг со мисераблы илл, тхат ит уас импоссибле фор дарцы то
      леаве хер, ор то рефраин фром саыинг, ин а тоне оф гентленесс анд
      цоммисератион, “лет ме цалл ыоур маид. ис тхере нотхинг ыоу цоулд
      таке то гиве ыоу пресент релиеф? а гласс оф уине; схалл и гет ыоу
      оне? ыоу аре веры илл.”

      “но, и тханк ыоу,” схе реплиед, ендеавоуринг то рецовер херселф.
      “тхере ис нотхинг тхе маттер уитх ме. и ам кууите уелл; и ам онлы
      дистрессед бы соме дреадфул неус ухицх и хаве жуст рецеивед фром
      лонгбоурн.”

      схе бурст инто теарс ас схе аллудед то ит, анд фор а феу минутес
      цоулд нот спеак анотхер уорд. дарцы, ин уретцхед суспенсе, цоулд
      онлы саы сометхинг индистинцтлы оф хис цонцерн, анд обсерве хер
      ин цомпассионате силенце. ат ленгтх схе споке агаин. “и хаве жуст
      хад а леттер фром жане, уитх суцх дреадфул неус. ит цаннот бе
      цонцеалед фром аныоне. мы ыоунгер систер хас лефт алл хер
      фриендс—хас елопед; хас тхроун херселф инто тхе поуер оф—оф мр.
      уицкхам. тхеы аре гоне офф тогетхер фром бригхтон. _ыоу_ кноу хим
      тоо уелл то доубт тхе рест. схе хас но монеы, но цоннецтионс,
      нотхинг тхат цан темпт хим то—схе ис лост фор евер.”

      дарцы уас фиксед ин астонисхмент. “ухен и цонсидер,” схе аддед ин
      а ыет море агитатед воице, “тхат _и_ мигхт хаве превентед ит! _и_
      ухо кнеу ухат хе уас. хад и бут експлаинед соме парт оф ит
      онлы—соме парт оф ухат и леарнт, то мы оун фамилы! хад хис
      цхарацтер беен кноун, тхис цоулд нот хаве хаппенед. бут ит ис
      алл—алл тоо лате ноу.”

      “и ам гриевед индеед,” цриед дарцы; “гриевед—схоцкед. бут ис ит
      цертаин—абсолутелы цертаин?”

      “ох, ыес! тхеы лефт бригхтон тогетхер он сундаы нигхт, анд уере
      трацед алмост то лондон, бут нот беыонд; тхеы аре цертаинлы нот
      гоне то сцотланд.”

      “анд ухат хас беен доне, ухат хас беен аттемптед, то рецовер
      хер?”

      “мы фатхер ис гоне то лондон, анд жане хас уриттен то бег мы
      унцле’с иммедиате ассистанце; анд уе схалл бе офф, и хопе, ин
      халф-ан-хоур. бут нотхинг цан бе доне—и кноу веры уелл тхат
      нотхинг цан бе доне. хоу ис суцх а ман то бе уоркед он? хоу аре
      тхеы евен то бе дисцоверед? и хаве нот тхе смаллест хопе. ит ис
      еверы уаы хоррибле!”

      дарцы схоок хис хеад ин силент ацкууиесценце.

      “ухен _мы_ еыес уере опенед то хис реал цхарацтер—ох! хад и кноун
      ухат и оугхт, ухат и даред то до! бут и кнеу нот—и уас афраид оф
      доинг тоо муцх. уретцхед, уретцхед мистаке!”

      дарцы маде но ансуер. хе сеемед сцарцелы то хеар хер, анд уас
      уалкинг уп анд доун тхе роом ин еарнест медитатион, хис броу
      цонтрацтед, хис аир глоомы. елизабетх соон обсервед, анд
      инстантлы ундерстоод ит. хер поуер уас синкинг; еверытхинг _муст_
      синк ундер суцх а прооф оф фамилы уеакнесс, суцх ан ассуранце оф
      тхе деепест дисграце. схе цоулд неитхер уондер нор цондемн, бут
      тхе белиеф оф хис селф-цонкууест броугхт нотхинг цонсолаторы то
      хер босом, аффордед но паллиатион оф хер дистресс. ит уас, он тхе
      цонтрары, ексацтлы цалцулатед то маке хер ундерстанд хер оун
      уисхес; анд невер хад схе со хонестлы фелт тхат схе цоулд хаве
      ловед хим, ас ноу, ухен алл лове муст бе ваин.

      бут селф, тхоугх ит уоулд интруде, цоулд нот енгросс хер.
      лыдиа—тхе хумилиатион, тхе мисеры схе уас брингинг он тхем алл,
      соон суаллоуед уп еверы привате царе; анд цоверинг хер фаце уитх
      хер хандкерцхиеф, елизабетх уас соон лост то еверытхинг елсе;
      анд, афтер а паусе оф северал минутес, уас онлы рецаллед то а
      сенсе оф хер ситуатион бы тхе воице оф хер цомпанион, ухо, ин а
      маннер ухицх, тхоугх ит споке цомпассион, споке ликеуисе
      рестраинт, саид, “и ам афраид ыоу хаве беен лонг десиринг мы
      абсенце, нор хаве и анытхинг то плеад ин ексцусе оф мы стаы, бут
      реал, тхоугх унаваилинг цонцерн. уоулд то хеавен тхат анытхинг
      цоулд бе еитхер саид ор доне он мы парт тхат мигхт оффер
      цонсолатион то суцх дистресс! бут и уилл нот тормент ыоу уитх
      ваин уисхес, ухицх маы сеем пурпоселы то аск фор ыоур тханкс.
      тхис унфортунате аффаир уилл, и феар, превент мы систер’с хавинг
      тхе плеасуре оф сееинг ыоу ат пемберлеы то-даы.”

      “ох, ыес. бе со кинд ас то апологисе фор ус то мисс дарцы. саы
      тхат ургент бусинесс цаллс ус хоме иммедиателы. цонцеал тхе
      унхаппы трутх ас лонг ас ит ис поссибле, и кноу ит цаннот бе
      лонг.”

      хе реадилы ассуред хер оф хис сецрецы; агаин експрессед хис сорроу
      фор хер дистресс, уисхед ит а хаппиер цонцлусион тхан тхере уас
      ат пресент реасон то хопе, анд леавинг хис цомплиментс фор хер
      релатионс, уитх онлы оне сериоус, партинг лоок, уент ауаы.

      ас хе кууиттед тхе роом, елизабетх фелт хоу импробабле ит уас тхат
      тхеы схоулд евер сее еацх отхер агаин он суцх термс оф цордиалиты
      ас хад маркед тхеир северал меетингс ин дербысхире; анд ас схе
      тхреу а ретроспецтиве гланце овер тхе ухоле оф тхеир
      ацкууаинтанце, со фулл оф цонтрадицтионс анд вариетиес, сигхед ат
      тхе перверсенесс оф тхосе феелингс ухицх уоулд ноу хаве промотед
      итс цонтинуанце, анд уоулд формерлы хаве режоицед ин итс
      терминатион.

      иф гратитуде анд естеем аре гоод фоундатионс оф аффецтион,
      елизабетх’с цханге оф сентимент уилл бе неитхер импробабле нор
      фаулты. бут иф отхеруисе—иф регард спрингинг фром суцх соурцес ис
      унреасонабле ор уннатурал, ин цомпарисон оф ухат ис со офтен
      десцрибед ас арисинг он а фирст интервиеу уитх итс обжецт, анд
      евен бефоре туо уордс хаве беен ексцхангед, нотхинг цан бе саид ин
      хер дефенце, ексцепт тхат схе хад гивен сомеухат оф а триал то тхе
      латтер метход ин хер партиалиты фор уицкхам, анд тхат итс илл
      суццесс мигхт, перхапс, аутхорисе хер то сеек тхе отхер лесс
      интерестинг моде оф аттацхмент. бе тхат ас ит маы, схе сау хим го
      уитх регрет; анд ин тхис еарлы ексампле оф ухат лыдиа’с инфамы
      муст продуце, фоунд аддитионал ангуисх ас схе рефлецтед он тхат
      уретцхед бусинесс. невер, синце реадинг жане’с сецонд леттер, хад
      схе ентертаинед а хопе оф уицкхам’с меанинг то марры хер. но оне
      бут жане, схе тхоугхт, цоулд флаттер херселф уитх суцх ан
      експецтатион. сурприсе уас тхе леаст оф хер феелингс он тхис
      девелопмент. ухиле тхе цонтентс оф тхе фирст леттер ремаинед ин
      хер минд, схе уас алл сурприсе—алл астонисхмент тхат уицкхам
      схоулд марры а гирл ухом ит уас импоссибле хе цоулд марры фор
      монеы; анд хоу лыдиа цоулд евер хаве аттацхед хим хад аппеаред
      инцомпрехенсибле. бут ноу ит уас алл тоо натурал. фор суцх ан
      аттацхмент ас тхис схе мигхт хаве суффициент цхармс; анд тхоугх
      схе дид нот суппосе лыдиа то бе делиберателы енгагинг ин ан
      елопемент уитхоут тхе интентион оф марриаге, схе хад но
      диффицулты ин белиевинг тхат неитхер хер виртуе нор хер
      ундерстандинг уоулд пресерве хер фром фаллинг ан еасы преы.

      схе хад невер перцеивед, ухиле тхе регимент уас ин хертфордсхире,
      тхат лыдиа хад аны партиалиты фор хим; бут схе уас цонвинцед тхат
      лыдиа уантед онлы енцоурагемент то аттацх херселф то аныбоды.
      сометимес оне оффицер, сометимес анотхер, хад беен хер фавоурите,
      ас тхеир аттентионс раисед тхем ин хер опинион. хер аффецтионс
      хад цонтинуаллы беен флуцтуатинг бут невер уитхоут ан обжецт. тхе
      мисцхиеф оф неглецт анд мистакен индулгенце тоуардс суцх а
      гирл—ох! хоу ацутелы дид схе ноу феел ит!

      схе уас уилд то бе ат хоме—то хеар, то сее, то бе упон тхе спот
      то схаре уитх жане ин тхе царес тхат муст ноу фалл ухоллы упон
      хер, ин а фамилы со дерангед, а фатхер абсент, а мотхер инцапабле
      оф ексертион, анд рекууиринг цонстант аттенданце; анд тхоугх алмост
      персуадед тхат нотхинг цоулд бе доне фор лыдиа, хер унцле’с
      интерференце сеемед оф тхе утмост импортанце, анд тилл хе ентеред
      тхе роом хер импатиенце уас севере. мр. анд мрс. гардинер хад
      хурриед бацк ин аларм, суппосинг бы тхе сервант’с аццоунт тхат
      тхеир ниеце уас такен судденлы илл; бут сатисфыинг тхем инстантлы
      он тхат хеад, схе еагерлы цоммуницатед тхе цаусе оф тхеир
      суммонс, реадинг тхе туо леттерс алоуд, анд дуеллинг он тхе
      постсцрипт оф тхе ласт уитх тремблинг енергы.— тхоугх лыдиа хад
      невер беен а фавоурите уитх тхем, мр. анд мрс. гардинер цоулд нот
      бут бе дееплы аффлицтед. нот лыдиа онлы, бут алл уере цонцернед
      ин ит; анд афтер тхе фирст ексцламатионс оф сурприсе анд хоррор,
      мр. гардинер промисед еверы ассистанце ин хис поуер. елизабетх,
      тхоугх експецтинг но лесс, тханкед хим уитх теарс оф гратитуде;
      анд алл тхрее беинг ацтуатед бы оне спирит, еверытхинг релатинг
      то тхеир жоурнеы уас спеедилы сеттлед. тхеы уере то бе офф ас
      соон ас поссибле. “бут ухат ис то бе доне абоут пемберлеы?” цриед
      мрс. гардинер. “жохн толд ус мр. дарцы уас хере ухен ыоу сент фор
      ус; уас ит со?”

      “ыес; анд и толд хим уе схоулд нот бе абле то кееп оур
      енгагемент. _тхат_ ис алл сеттлед.”

      “ухат ис алл сеттлед?” репеатед тхе отхер, ас схе ран инто хер
      роом то препаре. “анд аре тхеы упон суцх термс ас фор хер то
      дисцлосе тхе реал трутх? ох, тхат и кнеу хоу ит уас!”

      бут уисхес уере ваин, ор ат леаст цоулд онлы серве то амусе хер
      ин тхе хурры анд цонфусион оф тхе фоллоуинг хоур. хад елизабетх
      беен ат леисуре то бе идле, схе уоулд хаве ремаинед цертаин тхат
      алл емплоымент уас импоссибле то оне со уретцхед ас херселф; бут
      схе хад хер схаре оф бусинесс ас уелл ас хер аунт, анд амонгст
      тхе рест тхере уере нотес то бе уриттен то алл тхеир фриендс ат
      ламбтон, уитх фалсе ексцусес фор тхеир судден департуре. ан хоур,
      хоуевер, сау тхе ухоле цомплетед; анд мр. гардинер меанухиле
      хавинг сеттлед хис аццоунт ат тхе инн, нотхинг ремаинед то бе
      доне бут то го; анд елизабетх, афтер алл тхе мисеры оф тхе
      морнинг, фоунд херселф, ин а схортер спаце оф тиме тхан схе цоулд
      хаве суппосед, сеатед ин тхе царриаге, анд он тхе роад то
      лонгбоурн.




      цхаптер 47

      “и хаве беен тхинкинг ит овер агаин, елизабетх,” саид хер унцле,
      ас тхеы дрове фром тхе тоун; “анд реаллы, упон сериоус
      цонсидератион, и ам муцх море инцлинед тхан и уас то жудге ас
      ыоур елдест систер доес он тхе маттер. ит аппеарс то ме со веры
      унликелы тхат аны ыоунг ман схоулд форм суцх а десигн агаинст а
      гирл ухо ис бы но меанс унпротецтед ор фриендлесс, анд ухо уас
      ацтуаллы стаыинг ин хис цолонел’с фамилы, тхат и ам стронглы
      инцлинед то хопе тхе бест. цоулд хе експецт тхат хер фриендс уоулд
      нот степ форуард? цоулд хе експецт то бе нотицед агаин бы тхе
      регимент, афтер суцх ан аффронт то цолонел форстер? хис
      темптатион ис нот адекууате то тхе риск!”

      “до ыоу реаллы тхинк со?” цриед елизабетх, бригхтенинг уп фор а
      момент.

      “упон мы уорд,” саид мрс. гардинер, “и бегин то бе оф ыоур
      унцле’с опинион. ит ис реаллы тоо греат а виолатион оф деценцы,
      хоноур, анд интерест, фор хим то бе гуилты оф. и цаннот тхинк со
      веры илл оф уицкхам. цан ыоу ыоурселф, лиззы, со ухоллы гиве хим
      уп, ас то белиеве хим цапабле оф ит?”

      “нот, перхапс, оф неглецтинг хис оун интерест; бут оф еверы отхер
      неглецт и цан белиеве хим цапабле. иф, индеед, ит схоулд бе со!
      бут и даре нот хопе ит. ухы схоулд тхеы нот го он то сцотланд иф
      тхат хад беен тхе цасе?”

      “ин тхе фирст плаце,” реплиед мр. гардинер, “тхере ис но абсолуте
      прооф тхат тхеы аре нот гоне то сцотланд.”

      “ох! бут тхеир ремовинг фром тхе цхаисе инто а хацкнеы цоацх ис
      суцх а пресумптион! анд, бесидес, но трацес оф тхем уере то бе
      фоунд он тхе барнет роад.”

      “уелл, тхен—суппосинг тхем то бе ин лондон. тхеы маы бе тхере,
      тхоугх фор тхе пурпосе оф цонцеалмент, фор но море ексцептионал
      пурпосе. ит ис нот ликелы тхат монеы схоулд бе веры абундант он
      еитхер сиде; анд ит мигхт стрике тхем тхат тхеы цоулд бе море
      ецономицаллы, тхоугх лесс експедитиоуслы, марриед ин лондон тхан
      ин сцотланд.”

      “бут ухы алл тхис сецрецы? ухы аны феар оф детецтион? ухы муст
      тхеир марриаге бе привате? ох, но, но—тхис ис нот ликелы. хис
      мост партицулар фриенд, ыоу сее бы жане’с аццоунт, уас персуадед
      оф хис невер интендинг то марры хер. уицкхам уилл невер марры а
      уоман уитхоут соме монеы. хе цаннот аффорд ит. анд ухат цлаимс
      хас лыдиа—ухат аттрацтион хас схе беыонд ыоутх, хеалтх, анд гоод
      хумоур тхат цоулд маке хим, фор хер саке, форего еверы цханце оф
      бенефитинг химселф бы маррыинг уелл? ас то ухат рестраинт тхе
      аппрехенсионс оф дисграце ин тхе цорпс мигхт тхроу он а
      дисхоноурабле елопемент уитх хер, и ам нот абле то жудге; фор и
      кноу нотхинг оф тхе еффецтс тхат суцх а степ мигхт продуце. бут
      ас то ыоур отхер обжецтион, и ам афраид ит уилл хардлы холд гоод.
      лыдиа хас но бротхерс то степ форуард; анд хе мигхт имагине, фром
      мы фатхер’с бехавиоур, фром хис индоленце анд тхе литтле
      аттентион хе хас евер сеемед то гиве то ухат уас гоинг форуард ин
      хис фамилы, тхат _хе_ уоулд до ас литтле, анд тхинк ас литтле
      абоут ит, ас аны фатхер цоулд до, ин суцх а маттер.”

      “бут цан ыоу тхинк тхат лыдиа ис со лост то еверытхинг бут лове
      оф хим ас то цонсент то ливе уитх хим он аны термс отхер тхан
      марриаге?”

      “ит доес сеем, анд ит ис мост схоцкинг индеед,” реплиед
      елизабетх, уитх теарс ин хер еыес, “тхат а систер’с сенсе оф
      деценцы анд виртуе ин суцх а поинт схоулд адмит оф доубт. бут,
      реаллы, и кноу нот ухат то саы. перхапс и ам нот доинг хер
      жустице. бут схе ис веры ыоунг; схе хас невер беен таугхт то
      тхинк он сериоус субжецтс; анд фор тхе ласт халф-ыеар, наы, фор а
      туелвемонтх—схе хас беен гивен уп то нотхинг бут амусемент анд
      ваниты. схе хас беен аллоуед то диспосе оф хер тиме ин тхе мост
      идле анд фриволоус маннер, анд то адопт аны опинионс тхат цаме ин
      хер уаы. синце тхе ——схире уере фирст кууартеред ин мерытон,
      нотхинг бут лове, флиртатион, анд оффицерс хаве беен ин хер хеад.
      схе хас беен доинг еверытхинг ин хер поуер бы тхинкинг анд
      талкинг он тхе субжецт, то гиве греатер—ухат схалл и цалл ит?
      сусцептибилиты то хер феелингс; ухицх аре натураллы ливелы
      еноугх. анд уе алл кноу тхат уицкхам хас еверы цхарм оф персон
      анд аддресс тхат цан цаптивате а уоман.”

      “бут ыоу сее тхат жане,” саид хер аунт, “доес нот тхинк со веры
      илл оф уицкхам ас то белиеве хим цапабле оф тхе аттемпт.”

      “оф ухом доес жане евер тхинк илл? анд ухо ис тхере, ухатевер
      мигхт бе тхеир формер цондуцт, тхат схе уоулд тхинк цапабле оф
      суцх ан аттемпт, тилл ит уере провед агаинст тхем? бут жане
      кноус, ас уелл ас и до, ухат уицкхам реаллы ис. уе ботх кноу тхат
      хе хас беен профлигате ин еверы сенсе оф тхе уорд; тхат хе хас
      неитхер интегриты нор хоноур; тхат хе ис ас фалсе анд децеитфул
      ас хе ис инсинуатинг.”

      “анд до ыоу реаллы кноу алл тхис?” цриед мрс. гардинер, ухосе
      цуриоситы ас то тхе моде оф хер интеллигенце уас алл аливе.

      “и до индеед,” реплиед елизабетх, цолоуринг. “и толд ыоу, тхе
      отхер даы, оф хис инфамоус бехавиоур то мр. дарцы; анд ыоу
      ыоурселф, ухен ласт ат лонгбоурн, хеард ин ухат маннер хе споке
      оф тхе ман ухо хад бехавед уитх суцх форбеаранце анд либералиты
      тоуардс хим. анд тхере аре отхер цирцумстанцес ухицх и ам нот ат
      либерты—ухицх ит ис нот уортх ухиле то релате; бут хис лиес абоут
      тхе ухоле пемберлеы фамилы аре ендлесс. фром ухат хе саид оф мисс
      дарцы и уас тхороугхлы препаред то сее а проуд, ресервед,
      дисагрееабле гирл. ыет хе кнеу то тхе цонтрары химселф. хе муст
      кноу тхат схе уас ас амиабле анд унпретендинг ас уе хаве фоунд
      хер.”

      “бут доес лыдиа кноу нотхинг оф тхис? цан схе бе игнорант оф ухат
      ыоу анд жане сеем со уелл то ундерстанд?”

      “ох, ыес!—тхат, тхат ис тхе уорст оф алл. тилл и уас ин кент, анд
      сау со муцх ботх оф мр. дарцы анд хис релатион цолонел
      фитзуиллиам, и уас игнорант оф тхе трутх мыселф. анд ухен и
      ретурнед хоме, тхе ——схире уас то леаве мерытон ин а уеек ор
      фортнигхт’с тиме. ас тхат уас тхе цасе, неитхер жане, то ухом и
      релатед тхе ухоле, нор и, тхоугхт ит нецессары то маке оур
      кноуледге публиц; фор оф ухат усе цоулд ит аппарентлы бе то аны
      оне, тхат тхе гоод опинион ухицх алл тхе неигхбоурхоод хад оф хим
      схоулд тхен бе овертхроун? анд евен ухен ит уас сеттлед тхат
      лыдиа схоулд го уитх мрс. форстер, тхе нецесситы оф опенинг хер
      еыес то хис цхарацтер невер оццурред то ме. тхат _схе_ цоулд бе
      ин аны дангер фром тхе децептион невер ентеред мы хеад. тхат суцх
      а цонсекууенце ас _тхис_ цоулд енсуе, ыоу маы еасилы белиеве, уас
      фар еноугх фром мы тхоугхтс.”

      “ухен тхеы алл ремовед то бригхтон, тхерефоре, ыоу хад но реасон,
      и суппосе, то белиеве тхем фонд оф еацх отхер?”

      “нот тхе слигхтест. и цан ремембер но сымптом оф аффецтион он
      еитхер сиде; анд хад анытхинг оф тхе кинд беен перцептибле, ыоу
      муст бе ауаре тхат оурс ис нот а фамилы он ухицх ит цоулд бе
      тхроун ауаы. ухен фирст хе ентеред тхе цорпс, схе уас реады
      еноугх то адмире хим; бут со уе алл уере. еверы гирл ин ор неар
      мерытон уас оут оф хер сенсес абоут хим фор тхе фирст туо монтхс;
      бут хе невер дистингуисхед _хер_ бы аны партицулар аттентион;
      анд, цонсекууентлы, афтер а модерате период оф екстравагант анд
      уилд адмиратион, хер фанцы фор хим гаве уаы, анд отхерс оф тхе
      регимент, ухо треатед хер уитх море дистинцтион, агаин бецаме хер
      фавоуритес.”

      ит маы бе еасилы белиевед, тхат хоуевер литтле оф новелты цоулд
      бе аддед то тхеир феарс, хопес, анд цонжецтурес, он тхис
      интерестинг субжецт, бы итс репеатед дисцуссион, но отхер цоулд
      детаин тхем фром ит лонг, дуринг тхе ухоле оф тхе жоурнеы. фром
      елизабетх’с тхоугхтс ит уас невер абсент. фиксед тхере бы тхе
      кеенест оф алл ангуисх, селф-репроацх, схе цоулд финд но интервал
      оф еасе ор форгетфулнесс.

      тхеы травеллед ас експедитиоуслы ас поссибле, анд, слеепинг оне
      нигхт он тхе роад, реацхед лонгбоурн бы диннер тиме тхе некст даы.
      ит уас а цомфорт то елизабетх то цонсидер тхат жане цоулд нот
      хаве беен уеариед бы лонг експецтатионс.

      тхе литтле гардинерс, аттрацтед бы тхе сигхт оф а цхаисе, уере
      стандинг он тхе степс оф тхе хоусе ас тхеы ентеред тхе паддоцк;
      анд, ухен тхе царриаге дрове уп то тхе доор, тхе жоыфул сурприсе
      тхат лигхтед уп тхеир фацес, анд дисплаыед итселф овер тхеир
      ухоле бодиес, ин а вариеты оф цаперс анд фрискс, уас тхе фирст
      плеасинг еарнест оф тхеир уелцоме.

      елизабетх жумпед оут; анд, афтер гивинг еацх оф тхем а хасты
      кисс, хурриед инто тхе вестибуле, ухере жане, ухо цаме руннинг
      доун фром хер мотхер’с апартмент, иммедиателы мет хер.

      елизабетх, ас схе аффецтионателы ембрацед хер, ухилст теарс
      филлед тхе еыес оф ботх, лост нот а момент ин аскинг ухетхер
      анытхинг хад беен хеард оф тхе фугитивес.

      “нот ыет,” реплиед жане. “бут ноу тхат мы деар унцле ис цоме, и
      хопе еверытхинг уилл бе уелл.”

      “ис мы фатхер ин тоун?”

      “ыес, хе уент он туесдаы, ас и уроте ыоу уорд.”

      “анд хаве ыоу хеард фром хим офтен?”

      “уе хаве хеард онлы туице. хе уроте ме а феу линес он уеднесдаы
      то саы тхат хе хад арривед ин сафеты, анд то гиве ме хис
      дирецтионс, ухицх и партицуларлы беггед хим то до. хе мерелы
      аддед тхат хе схоулд нот урите агаин тилл хе хад сометхинг оф
      импортанце то ментион.”

      “анд мы мотхер—хоу ис схе? хоу аре ыоу алл?”

      “мы мотхер ис толераблы уелл, и труст; тхоугх хер спиритс аре
      греатлы схакен. схе ис уп стаирс анд уилл хаве греат сатисфацтион
      ин сееинг ыоу алл. схе доес нот ыет леаве хер дрессинг-роом. мары
      анд китты, тханк хеавен, аре кууите уелл.”

      “бут ыоу—хоу аре ыоу?” цриед елизабетх. “ыоу лоок пале. хоу муцх
      ыоу муст хаве гоне тхроугх!”

      хер систер, хоуевер, ассуред хер оф хер беинг перфецтлы уелл; анд
      тхеир цонверсатион, ухицх хад беен пассинг ухиле мр. анд мрс.
      гардинер уере енгагед уитх тхеир цхилдрен, уас ноу пут ан енд то
      бы тхе аппроацх оф тхе ухоле парты. жане ран то хер унцле анд
      аунт, анд уелцомед анд тханкед тхем ботх, уитх алтернате смилес
      анд теарс.

      ухен тхеы уере алл ин тхе драуинг-роом, тхе кууестионс ухицх
      елизабетх хад алреады аскед уере оф цоурсе репеатед бы тхе
      отхерс, анд тхеы соон фоунд тхат жане хад но интеллигенце то
      гиве. тхе сангуине хопе оф гоод, хоуевер, ухицх тхе беневоленце
      оф хер хеарт суггестед хад нот ыет десертед хер; схе стилл
      експецтед тхат ит уоулд алл енд уелл, анд тхат еверы морнинг уоулд
      бринг соме леттер, еитхер фром лыдиа ор хер фатхер, то експлаин
      тхеир процеедингс, анд, перхапс, анноунце тхеир марриаге.

      мрс. беннет, то ухосе апартмент тхеы алл репаиред, афтер а феу
      минутес’ цонверсатион тогетхер, рецеивед тхем ексацтлы ас мигхт бе
      експецтед; уитх теарс анд ламентатионс оф регрет, инвецтивес
      агаинст тхе виллаиноус цондуцт оф уицкхам, анд цомплаинтс оф хер
      оун суфферингс анд илл-усаге; бламинг еверыбоды бут тхе персон то
      ухосе илл-жудгинг индулгенце тхе еррорс оф хер даугхтер муст
      принципаллы бе оуинг.

      “иф и хад беен абле,” саид схе, “то царры мы поинт ин гоинг то
      бригхтон, уитх алл мы фамилы, _тхис_ уоулд нот хаве хаппенед; бут
      поор деар лыдиа хад нободы то таке царе оф хер. ухы дид тхе
      форстерс евер лет хер го оут оф тхеир сигхт? и ам суре тхере уас
      соме греат неглецт ор отхер он тхеир сиде, фор схе ис нот тхе
      кинд оф гирл то до суцх а тхинг иф схе хад беен уелл лоокед
      афтер. и алуаыс тхоугхт тхеы уере веры унфит то хаве тхе цхарге
      оф хер; бут и уас оверрулед, ас и алуаыс ам. поор деар цхилд! анд
      ноу хере’с мр. беннет гоне ауаы, анд и кноу хе уилл фигхт
      уицкхам, ухеревер хе меетс хим анд тхен хе уилл бе киллед, анд
      ухат ис то бецоме оф ус алл? тхе цоллинсес уилл турн ус оут
      бефоре хе ис цолд ин хис граве, анд иф ыоу аре нот кинд то ус,
      бротхер, и до нот кноу ухат уе схалл до.”

      тхеы алл ексцлаимед агаинст суцх террифиц идеас; анд мр. гардинер,
      афтер генерал ассуранцес оф хис аффецтион фор хер анд алл хер
      фамилы, толд хер тхат хе меант то бе ин лондон тхе веры некст даы,
      анд уоулд ассист мр. беннет ин еверы ендеавоур фор рецоверинг
      лыдиа.

      “до нот гиве уаы то уселесс аларм,” аддед хе; “тхоугх ит ис ригхт
      то бе препаред фор тхе уорст, тхере ис но оццасион то лоок он ит
      ас цертаин. ит ис нот кууите а уеек синце тхеы лефт бригхтон. ин а
      феу даыс море уе маы гаин соме неус оф тхем; анд тилл уе кноу
      тхат тхеы аре нот марриед, анд хаве но десигн оф маррыинг, до нот
      лет ус гиве тхе маттер овер ас лост. ас соон ас и гет то тоун и
      схалл го то мы бротхер, анд маке хим цоме хоме уитх ме то
      грацецхурцх стреет; анд тхен уе маы цонсулт тогетхер ас то ухат
      ис то бе доне.”

      “ох! мы деар бротхер,” реплиед мрс. беннет, “тхат ис ексацтлы ухат
      и цоулд мост уисх фор. анд ноу до, ухен ыоу гет то тоун, финд
      тхем оут, ухеревер тхеы маы бе; анд иф тхеы аре нот марриед
      алреады, _маке_ тхем марры. анд ас фор уеддинг цлотхес, до нот
      лет тхем уаит фор тхат, бут телл лыдиа схе схалл хаве ас муцх
      монеы ас схе цхоосес то буы тхем, афтер тхеы аре марриед. анд,
      абове алл, кееп мр. беннет фром фигхтинг. телл хим ухат а
      дреадфул стате и ам ин, тхат и ам фригхтед оут оф мы уитс—анд
      хаве суцх тремблингс, суцх флуттерингс, алл овер ме—суцх спасмс
      ин мы сиде анд паинс ин мы хеад, анд суцх беатингс ат хеарт, тхат
      и цан гет но рест бы нигхт нор бы даы. анд телл мы деар лыдиа нот
      то гиве аны дирецтионс абоут хер цлотхес тилл схе хас сеен ме,
      фор схе доес нот кноу ухицх аре тхе бест уарехоусес. ох, бротхер,
      хоу кинд ыоу аре! и кноу ыоу уилл цонтриве ит алл.”

      бут мр. гардинер, тхоугх хе ассуред хер агаин оф хис еарнест
      ендеавоурс ин тхе цаусе, цоулд нот авоид рецоммендинг модератион
      то хер, ас уелл ин хер хопес ас хер феар; анд афтер талкинг уитх
      хер ин тхис маннер тилл диннер уас он тхе табле, тхеы алл лефт
      хер то вент алл хер феелингс он тхе хоусекеепер, ухо аттендед ин
      тхе абсенце оф хер даугхтерс.

      тхоугх хер бротхер анд систер уере персуадед тхат тхере уас но
      реал оццасион фор суцх а сецлусион фром тхе фамилы, тхеы дид нот
      аттемпт то оппосе ит, фор тхеы кнеу тхат схе хад нот пруденце
      еноугх то холд хер тонгуе бефоре тхе сервантс, ухиле тхеы уаитед
      ат табле, анд жудгед ит беттер тхат _оне_ онлы оф тхе хоусехолд,
      анд тхе оне ухом тхеы цоулд мост труст схоулд цомпрехенд алл хер
      феарс анд солицитуде он тхе субжецт.

      ин тхе дининг-роом тхеы уере соон жоинед бы мары анд китты, ухо
      хад беен тоо бусилы енгагед ин тхеир сепарате апартментс то маке
      тхеир аппеаранце бефоре. оне цаме фром хер боокс, анд тхе отхер
      фром хер тоилетте. тхе фацес оф ботх, хоуевер, уере толераблы
      цалм; анд но цханге уас висибле ин еитхер, ексцепт тхат тхе лосс
      оф хер фавоурите систер, ор тхе ангер ухицх схе хад херселф
      инцурред ин тхис бусинесс, хад гивен море оф фретфулнесс тхан
      усуал то тхе аццентс оф китты. ас фор мары, схе уас мистресс
      еноугх оф херселф то ухиспер то елизабетх, уитх а цоунтенанце оф
      граве рефлецтион, соон афтер тхеы уере сеатед ат табле:

      “тхис ис а мост унфортунате аффаир, анд уилл пробаблы бе муцх
      талкед оф. бут уе муст стем тхе тиде оф малице, анд поур инто тхе
      уоундед босомс оф еацх отхер тхе балм оф систерлы цонсолатион.”

      тхен, перцеивинг ин елизабетх но инцлинатион оф реплыинг, схе
      аддед, “унхаппы ас тхе евент муст бе фор лыдиа, уе маы драу фром
      ит тхис усефул лессон: тхат лосс оф виртуе ин а фемале ис
      ирретриевабле; тхат оне фалсе степ инволвес хер ин ендлесс руин;
      тхат хер репутатион ис но лесс бриттле тхан ит ис беаутифул; анд
      тхат схе цаннот бе тоо муцх гуардед ин хер бехавиоур тоуардс тхе
      ундесервинг оф тхе отхер секс.”

      елизабетх лифтед уп хер еыес ин амаземент, бут уас тоо муцх
      оппрессед то маке аны реплы. мары, хоуевер, цонтинуед то цонсоле
      херселф уитх суцх кинд оф морал екстрацтионс фром тхе евил бефоре
      тхем.

      ин тхе афтерноон, тхе туо елдер мисс беннетс уере абле то бе фор
      халф-ан-хоур бы тхемселвес; анд елизабетх инстантлы аваилед
      херселф оф тхе оппортуниты оф макинг аны инкууириес, ухицх жане
      уас екууаллы еагер то сатисфы. афтер жоининг ин генерал
      ламентатионс овер тхе дреадфул секууел оф тхис евент, ухицх
      елизабетх цонсидеред ас алл бут цертаин, анд мисс беннет цоулд
      нот ассерт то бе ухоллы импоссибле, тхе формер цонтинуед тхе
      субжецт, бы саыинг, “бут телл ме алл анд еверытхинг абоут ит
      ухицх и хаве нот алреады хеард. гиве ме фуртхер партицуларс. ухат
      дид цолонел форстер саы? хад тхеы но аппрехенсион оф анытхинг
      бефоре тхе елопемент тоок плаце? тхеы муст хаве сеен тхем
      тогетхер фор евер.”

      “цолонел форстер дид оун тхат хе хад офтен суспецтед соме
      партиалиты, еспециаллы он лыдиа’с сиде, бут нотхинг то гиве хим
      аны аларм. и ам со гриевед фор хим! хис бехавиоур уас аттентиве
      анд кинд то тхе утмост. хе _уас_ цоминг то ус, ин ордер то ассуре
      ус оф хис цонцерн, бефоре хе хад аны идеа оф тхеир нот беинг гоне
      то сцотланд: ухен тхат аппрехенсион фирст гот аброад, ит хастенед
      хис жоурнеы.”

      “анд уас денны цонвинцед тхат уицкхам уоулд нот марры? дид хе
      кноу оф тхеир интендинг то го офф? хад цолонел форстер сеен денны
      химселф?”

      “ыес; бут, ухен кууестионед бы _хим_, денны дениед кноуинг
      анытхинг оф тхеир планс, анд уоулд нот гиве хис реал опинион
      абоут ит. хе дид нот репеат хис персуасион оф тхеир нот
      маррыинг—анд фром _тхат_, и ам инцлинед то хопе, хе мигхт хаве
      беен мисундерстоод бефоре.”

      “анд тилл цолонел форстер цаме химселф, нот оне оф ыоу
      ентертаинед а доубт, и суппосе, оф тхеир беинг реаллы марриед?”

      “хоу уас ит поссибле тхат суцх ан идеа схоулд ентер оур браинс? и
      фелт а литтле унеасы—а литтле феарфул оф мы систер’с хаппинесс
      уитх хим ин марриаге, бецаусе и кнеу тхат хис цондуцт хад нот
      беен алуаыс кууите ригхт. мы фатхер анд мотхер кнеу нотхинг оф
      тхат; тхеы онлы фелт хоу импрудент а матцх ит муст бе. китты тхен
      оунед, уитх а веры натурал триумпх он кноуинг море тхан тхе рест
      оф ус, тхат ин лыдиа’с ласт леттер схе хад препаред хер фор суцх
      а степ. схе хад кноун, ит сеемс, оф тхеир беинг ин лове уитх еацх
      отхер, маны уеекс.”

      “бут нот бефоре тхеы уент то бригхтон?”

      “но, и белиеве нот.”

      “анд дид цолонел форстер аппеар то тхинк уелл оф уицкхам химселф?
      доес хе кноу хис реал цхарацтер?”

      “и муст цонфесс тхат хе дид нот спеак со уелл оф уицкхам ас хе
      формерлы дид. хе белиевед хим то бе импрудент анд екстравагант.
      анд синце тхис сад аффаир хас такен плаце, ит ис саид тхат хе
      лефт мерытон греатлы ин дебт; бут и хопе тхис маы бе фалсе.”

      “ох, жане, хад уе беен лесс сецрет, хад уе толд ухат уе кнеу оф
      хим, тхис цоулд нот хаве хаппенед!”

      “перхапс ит уоулд хаве беен беттер,” реплиед хер систер. “бут то
      експосе тхе формер фаултс оф аны персон уитхоут кноуинг ухат тхеир
      пресент феелингс уере, сеемед унжустифиабле. уе ацтед уитх тхе
      бест интентионс.”

      “цоулд цолонел форстер репеат тхе партицуларс оф лыдиа’с ноте то
      хис уифе?”

      “хе броугхт ит уитх хим фор ус то сее.”

      жане тхен тоок ит фром хер поцкет-боок, анд гаве ит то елизабетх.
      тхесе уере тхе цонтентс:

      “мы деар харриет,
      “ыоу уилл лаугх ухен ыоу кноу ухере и ам гоне, анд и цаннот хелп
      лаугхинг мыселф ат ыоур сурприсе то-морроу морнинг, ас соон ас и
      ам миссед. и ам гоинг то гретна греен, анд иф ыоу цаннот гуесс
      уитх ухо, и схалл тхинк ыоу а симплетон, фор тхере ис бут оне ман
      ин тхе уорлд и лове, анд хе ис ан ангел. и схоулд невер бе хаппы
      уитхоут хим, со тхинк ит но харм то бе офф. ыоу неед нот сенд
      тхем уорд ат лонгбоурн оф мы гоинг, иф ыоу до нот лике ит, фор ит
      уилл маке тхе сурприсе тхе греатер, ухен и урите то тхем анд сигн
      мы наме ‘лыдиа уицкхам.’ ухат а гоод жоке ит уилл бе! и цан
      хардлы урите фор лаугхинг. праы маке мы ексцусес то пратт фор нот
      кеепинг мы енгагемент, анд данцинг уитх хим то-нигхт. телл хим и
      хопе хе уилл ексцусе ме ухен хе кноус алл; анд телл хим и уилл
      данце уитх хим ат тхе некст балл уе меет, уитх греат плеасуре. и
      схалл сенд фор мы цлотхес ухен и гет то лонгбоурн; бут и уисх ыоу
      уоулд телл саллы то менд а греат слит ин мы уоркед муслин гоун
      бефоре тхеы аре пацкед уп. гоод-бые. гиве мы лове то цолонел
      форстер. и хопе ыоу уилл дринк то оур гоод жоурнеы.

      “ыоур аффецтионате фриенд,
      “лыдиа беннет.”

      “ох! тхоугхтлесс, тхоугхтлесс лыдиа!” цриед елизабетх ухен схе
      хад финисхед ит. “ухат а леттер ис тхис, то бе уриттен ат суцх а
      момент! бут ат леаст ит схоус тхат _схе_ уас сериоус он тхе
      субжецт оф тхеир жоурнеы. ухатевер хе мигхт афтеруардс персуаде
      хер то, ит уас нот он хер сиде а _сцхеме_ оф инфамы. мы поор
      фатхер! хоу хе муст хаве фелт ит!”

      “и невер сау аныоне со схоцкед. хе цоулд нот спеак а уорд фор
      фулл тен минутес. мы мотхер уас такен илл иммедиателы, анд тхе
      ухоле хоусе ин суцх цонфусион!”

      “ох! жане,” цриед елизабетх, “уас тхере а сервант белонгинг то ит
      ухо дид нот кноу тхе ухоле сторы бефоре тхе енд оф тхе даы?”

      “и до нот кноу. и хопе тхере уас. бут то бе гуардед ат суцх а
      тиме ис веры диффицулт. мы мотхер уас ин хыстерицс, анд тхоугх и
      ендеавоуред то гиве хер еверы ассистанце ин мы поуер, и ам афраид
      и дид нот до со муцх ас и мигхт хаве доне! бут тхе хоррор оф ухат
      мигхт поссиблы хаппен алмост тоок фром ме мы фацултиес.”

      “ыоур аттенданце упон хер хас беен тоо муцх фор ыоу. ыоу до нот
      лоок уелл. ох тхат и хад беен уитх ыоу! ыоу хаве хад еверы царе
      анд анксиеты упон ыоурселф алоне.”

      “мары анд китты хаве беен веры кинд, анд уоулд хаве схаред ин
      еверы фатигуе, и ам суре; бут и дид нот тхинк ит ригхт фор еитхер
      оф тхем. китты ис слигхт анд делицате; анд мары студиес со муцх,
      тхат хер хоурс оф репосе схоулд нот бе брокен ин он. мы аунт
      пхиллипс цаме то лонгбоурн он туесдаы, афтер мы фатхер уент ауаы;
      анд уас со гоод ас то стаы тилл тхурсдаы уитх ме. схе уас оф
      греат усе анд цомфорт то ус алл. анд лады луцас хас беен веры
      кинд; схе уалкед хере он уеднесдаы морнинг то цондоле уитх ус,
      анд офферед хер сервицес, ор аны оф хер даугхтерс’, иф тхеы
      схоулд бе оф усе то ус.”

      “схе хад беттер хаве стаыед ат хоме,” цриед елизабетх; “перхапс
      схе _меант_ уелл, бут, ундер суцх а мисфортуне ас тхис, оне
      цаннот сее тоо литтле оф оне’с неигхбоурс. ассистанце ис
      импоссибле; цондоленце инсуфферабле. лет тхем триумпх овер ус ат
      а дистанце, анд бе сатисфиед.”

      схе тхен процеедед то инкууире инто тхе меасурес ухицх хер фатхер
      хад интендед то пурсуе, ухиле ин тоун, фор тхе рецоверы оф хис
      даугхтер.

      “хе меант и белиеве,” реплиед жане, “то го то епсом, тхе плаце
      ухере тхеы ласт цхангед хорсес, сее тхе постилионс анд тры иф
      анытхинг цоулд бе маде оут фром тхем. хис принципал обжецт муст
      бе то дисцовер тхе нумбер оф тхе хацкнеы цоацх ухицх тоок тхем
      фром цлапхам. ит хад цоме уитх а фаре фром лондон; анд ас хе
      тхоугхт тхат тхе цирцумстанце оф а гентлеман анд лады’с ремовинг
      фром оне царриаге инто анотхер мигхт бе ремаркед хе меант то маке
      инкууириес ат цлапхам. иф хе цоулд аныхоу дисцовер ат ухат хоусе
      тхе цоацхман хад бефоре сет доун хис фаре, хе детерминед то маке
      инкууириес тхере, анд хопед ит мигхт нот бе импоссибле то финд оут
      тхе станд анд нумбер оф тхе цоацх. и до нот кноу оф аны отхер
      десигнс тхат хе хад формед; бут хе уас ин суцх а хурры то бе
      гоне, анд хис спиритс со греатлы дисцомпосед, тхат и хад
      диффицулты ин финдинг оут евен со муцх ас тхис.”




      цхаптер 48

      тхе ухоле парты уере ин хопес оф а леттер фром мр. беннет тхе
      некст морнинг, бут тхе пост цаме ин уитхоут брингинг а сингле лине
      фром хим. хис фамилы кнеу хим то бе, он алл цоммон оццасионс, а
      мост неглигент анд дилаторы цорреспондент; бут ат суцх а тиме
      тхеы хад хопед фор ексертион. тхеы уере форцед то цонцлуде тхат хе
      хад но плеасинг интеллигенце то сенд; бут евен оф _тхат_ тхеы
      уоулд хаве беен глад то бе цертаин. мр. гардинер хад уаитед онлы
      фор тхе леттерс бефоре хе сет офф.

      ухен хе уас гоне, тхеы уере цертаин ат леаст оф рецеивинг
      цонстант информатион оф ухат уас гоинг он, анд тхеир унцле
      промисед, ат партинг, то преваил он мр. беннет то ретурн то
      лонгбоурн, ас соон ас хе цоулд, то тхе греат цонсолатион оф хис
      систер, ухо цонсидеред ит ас тхе онлы сецуриты фор хер хусбанд’с
      нот беинг киллед ин а дуел.

      мрс. гардинер анд тхе цхилдрен уере то ремаин ин хертфордсхире а
      феу даыс лонгер, ас тхе формер тхоугхт хер пресенце мигхт бе
      сервицеабле то хер ниецес. схе схаред ин тхеир аттенданце он мрс.
      беннет, анд уас а греат цомфорт то тхем ин тхеир хоурс оф
      фреедом. тхеир отхер аунт алсо виситед тхем фрекууентлы, анд
      алуаыс, ас схе саид, уитх тхе десигн оф цхееринг анд хеартенинг
      тхем уп—тхоугх, ас схе невер цаме уитхоут репортинг соме фресх
      инстанце оф уицкхам’с екстраваганце ор иррегулариты, схе селдом
      уент ауаы уитхоут леавинг тхем море диспиритед тхан схе фоунд
      тхем.

      алл мерытон сеемед стривинг то блацкен тхе ман ухо, бут тхрее
      монтхс бефоре, хад беен алмост ан ангел оф лигхт. хе уас децларед
      то бе ин дебт то еверы традесман ин тхе плаце, анд хис интригуес,
      алл хоноуред уитх тхе титле оф седуцтион, хад беен екстендед инто
      еверы традесман’с фамилы. еверыбоды децларед тхат хе уас тхе
      уицкедест ыоунг ман ин тхе уорлд; анд еверыбоды беган то финд оут
      тхат тхеы хад алуаыс диструстед тхе аппеаранце оф хис гооднесс.
      елизабетх, тхоугх схе дид нот цредит абове халф оф ухат уас саид,
      белиевед еноугх то маке хер формер ассуранце оф хер систер’с руин
      море цертаин; анд евен жане, ухо белиевед стилл лесс оф ит,
      бецаме алмост хопелесс, море еспециаллы ас тхе тиме уас ноу цоме
      ухен, иф тхеы хад гоне то сцотланд, ухицх схе хад невер бефоре
      ентирелы деспаиред оф, тхеы муст ин алл пробабилиты хаве гаинед
      соме неус оф тхем.

      мр. гардинер лефт лонгбоурн он сундаы; он туесдаы хис уифе
      рецеивед а леттер фром хим; ит толд тхем тхат, он хис арривал, хе
      хад иммедиателы фоунд оут хис бротхер, анд персуадед хим то цоме
      то грацецхурцх стреет; тхат мр. беннет хад беен то епсом анд
      цлапхам, бефоре хис арривал, бут уитхоут гаининг аны сатисфацторы
      информатион; анд тхат хе уас ноу детерминед то инкууире ат алл тхе
      принципал хотелс ин тоун, ас мр. беннет тхоугхт ит поссибле тхеы
      мигхт хаве гоне то оне оф тхем, он тхеир фирст цоминг то лондон,
      бефоре тхеы процуред лодгингс. мр. гардинер химселф дид нот
      експецт аны суццесс фром тхис меасуре, бут ас хис бротхер уас
      еагер ин ит, хе меант то ассист хим ин пурсуинг ит. хе аддед тхат
      мр. беннет сеемед ухоллы дисинцлинед ат пресент то леаве лондон
      анд промисед то урите агаин веры соон. тхере уас алсо а
      постсцрипт то тхис еффецт:

      “и хаве уриттен то цолонел форстер то десире хим то финд оут, иф
      поссибле, фром соме оф тхе ыоунг ман’с интиматес ин тхе регимент,
      ухетхер уицкхам хас аны релатионс ор цоннецтионс ухо уоулд бе
      ликелы то кноу ин ухат парт оф тоун хе хас ноу цонцеалед химселф.
      иф тхере уере аныоне тхат оне цоулд апплы то уитх а пробабилиты
      оф гаининг суцх а цлуе ас тхат, ит мигхт бе оф ессентиал
      цонсекууенце. ат пресент уе хаве нотхинг то гуиде ус. цолонел
      форстер уилл, и даре саы, до еверытхинг ин хис поуер то сатисфы
      ус он тхис хеад. бут, он сецонд тхоугхтс, перхапс, лиззы цоулд
      телл ус ухат релатионс хе хас ноу ливинг, беттер тхан аны отхер
      персон.”

      елизабетх уас ат но лосс то ундерстанд фром ухенце тхис деференце
      то хер аутхориты процеедед; бут ит уас нот ин хер поуер то гиве
      аны информатион оф со сатисфацторы а натуре ас тхе цомплимент
      десервед. схе хад невер хеард оф хис хавинг хад аны релатионс,
      ексцепт а фатхер анд мотхер, ботх оф ухом хад беен деад маны
      ыеарс. ит уас поссибле, хоуевер, тхат соме оф хис цомпанионс ин
      тхе ——схире мигхт бе абле то гиве море информатион; анд тхоугх
      схе уас нот веры сангуине ин експецтинг ит, тхе апплицатион уас а
      сометхинг то лоок форуард то.

      еверы даы ат лонгбоурн уас ноу а даы оф анксиеты; бут тхе мост
      анксиоус парт оф еацх уас ухен тхе пост уас експецтед. тхе арривал
      оф леттерс уас тхе гранд обжецт оф еверы морнинг’с импатиенце.
      тхроугх леттерс, ухатевер оф гоод ор бад уас то бе толд уоулд бе
      цоммуницатед, анд еверы суццеединг даы уас експецтед то бринг соме
      неус оф импортанце.

      бут бефоре тхеы хеард агаин фром мр. гардинер, а леттер арривед
      фор тхеир фатхер, фром а дифферент кууартер, фром мр. цоллинс;
      ухицх, ас жане хад рецеивед дирецтионс то опен алл тхат цаме фор
      хим ин хис абсенце, схе аццординглы реад; анд елизабетх, ухо кнеу
      ухат цуриоситиес хис леттерс алуаыс уере, лоокед овер хер, анд
      реад ит ликеуисе. ит уас ас фоллоус:

      “мы деар сир,
      “и феел мыселф цаллед упон, бы оур релатионсхип, анд мы ситуатион
      ин лифе, то цондоле уитх ыоу он тхе гриевоус аффлицтион ыоу аре
      ноу суфферинг ундер, оф ухицх уе уере ыестердаы информед бы а
      леттер фром хертфордсхире. бе ассуред, мы деар сир, тхат мрс.
      цоллинс анд мыселф синцерелы сымпатхисе уитх ыоу анд алл ыоур
      респецтабле фамилы, ин ыоур пресент дистресс, ухицх муст бе оф
      тхе биттерест кинд, бецаусе процеединг фром а цаусе ухицх но тиме
      цан ремове. но аргументс схалл бе уантинг он мы парт тхат цан
      аллевиате со севере а мисфортуне—ор тхат маы цомфорт ыоу, ундер а
      цирцумстанце тхат муст бе оф алл отхерс тхе мост аффлицтинг то а
      парент’с минд. тхе деатх оф ыоур даугхтер уоулд хаве беен а
      блессинг ин цомпарисон оф тхис. анд ит ис тхе море то бе
      ламентед, бецаусе тхере ис реасон то суппосе ас мы деар цхарлотте
      информс ме, тхат тхис лицентиоуснесс оф бехавиоур ин ыоур
      даугхтер хас процеедед фром а фаулты дегрее оф индулгенце;
      тхоугх, ат тхе саме тиме, фор тхе цонсолатион оф ыоурселф анд
      мрс. беннет, и ам инцлинед то тхинк тхат хер оун диспоситион муст
      бе натураллы бад, ор схе цоулд нот бе гуилты оф суцх ан енормиты,
      ат со еарлы ан аге. хоусоевер тхат маы бе, ыоу аре гриевоуслы то
      бе питиед; ин ухицх опинион и ам нот онлы жоинед бы мрс. цоллинс,
      бут ликеуисе бы лады цатхерине анд хер даугхтер, то ухом и хаве
      релатед тхе аффаир. тхеы агрее уитх ме ин аппрехендинг тхат тхис
      фалсе степ ин оне даугхтер уилл бе инжуриоус то тхе фортунес оф
      алл тхе отхерс; фор ухо, ас лады цатхерине херселф
      цондесцендинглы саыс, уилл цоннецт тхемселвес уитх суцх а фамилы?
      анд тхис цонсидератион леадс ме мореовер то рефлецт, уитх
      аугментед сатисфацтион, он а цертаин евент оф ласт новембер; фор
      хад ит беен отхеруисе, и муст хаве беен инволвед ин алл ыоур
      сорроу анд дисграце. лет ме тхен адвисе ыоу, деар сир, то цонсоле
      ыоурселф ас муцх ас поссибле, то тхроу офф ыоур унуортхы цхилд
      фром ыоур аффецтион фор евер, анд леаве хер то реап тхе фруитс оф
      хер оун хеиноус оффенсе.

      “и ам, деар сир, етц., етц.”

      мр. гардинер дид нот урите агаин тилл хе хад рецеивед ан ансуер
      фром цолонел форстер; анд тхен хе хад нотхинг оф а плеасант
      натуре то сенд. ит уас нот кноун тхат уицкхам хад а сингле
      релатионсхип уитх ухом хе кепт уп аны цоннецтион, анд ит уас
      цертаин тхат хе хад но неар оне ливинг. хис формер ацкууаинтанцес
      хад беен нумероус; бут синце хе хад беен ин тхе милитиа, ит дид
      нот аппеар тхат хе уас он термс оф партицулар фриендсхип уитх аны
      оф тхем. тхере уас но оне, тхерефоре, ухо цоулд бе поинтед оут ас
      ликелы то гиве аны неус оф хим. анд ин тхе уретцхед стате оф хис
      оун финанцес, тхере уас а веры поуерфул мотиве фор сецрецы, ин
      аддитион то хис феар оф дисцоверы бы лыдиа’с релатионс, фор ит
      хад жуст транспиред тхат хе хад лефт гаминг дебтс бехинд хим то а
      веры цонсидерабле амоунт. цолонел форстер белиевед тхат море тхан
      а тхоусанд поундс уоулд бе нецессары то цлеар хис експенсес ат
      бригхтон. хе оуед а гоод деал ин тоун, бут хис дебтс оф хоноур
      уере стилл море формидабле. мр. гардинер дид нот аттемпт то
      цонцеал тхесе партицуларс фром тхе лонгбоурн фамилы. жане хеард
      тхем уитх хоррор. “а гаместер!” схе цриед. “тхис ис ухоллы
      унекспецтед. и хад нот ан идеа оф ит.”

      мр. гардинер аддед ин хис леттер, тхат тхеы мигхт експецт то сее
      тхеир фатхер ат хоме он тхе фоллоуинг даы, ухицх уас сатурдаы.
      рендеред спиритлесс бы тхе илл-суццесс оф алл тхеир ендеавоурс,
      хе хад ыиелдед то хис бротхер-ин-лау’с ентреаты тхат хе уоулд
      ретурн то хис фамилы, анд леаве ит то хим то до ухатевер оццасион
      мигхт суггест то бе адвисабле фор цонтинуинг тхеир пурсуит. ухен
      мрс. беннет уас толд оф тхис, схе дид нот експресс со муцх
      сатисфацтион ас хер цхилдрен експецтед, цонсидеринг ухат хер
      анксиеты фор хис лифе хад беен бефоре.

      “ухат, ис хе цоминг хоме, анд уитхоут поор лыдиа?” схе цриед.
      “суре хе уилл нот леаве лондон бефоре хе хас фоунд тхем. ухо ис
      то фигхт уицкхам, анд маке хим марры хер, иф хе цомес ауаы?”

      ас мрс. гардинер беган то уисх то бе ат хоме, ит уас сеттлед тхат
      схе анд тхе цхилдрен схоулд го то лондон, ат тхе саме тиме тхат
      мр. беннет цаме фром ит. тхе цоацх, тхерефоре, тоок тхем тхе
      фирст стаге оф тхеир жоурнеы, анд броугхт итс мастер бацк то
      лонгбоурн.

      мрс. гардинер уент ауаы ин алл тхе перплекситы абоут елизабетх анд
      хер дербысхире фриенд тхат хад аттендед хер фром тхат парт оф тхе
      уорлд. хис наме хад невер беен волунтарилы ментионед бефоре тхем
      бы хер ниеце; анд тхе кинд оф халф-експецтатион ухицх мрс.
      гардинер хад формед, оф тхеир беинг фоллоуед бы а леттер фром
      хим, хад ендед ин нотхинг. елизабетх хад рецеивед ноне синце хер
      ретурн тхат цоулд цоме фром пемберлеы.

      тхе пресент унхаппы стате оф тхе фамилы рендеред аны отхер ексцусе
      фор тхе лоунесс оф хер спиритс уннецессары; нотхинг, тхерефоре,
      цоулд бе фаирлы цонжецтуред фром _тхат_, тхоугх елизабетх, ухо
      уас бы тхис тиме толераблы уелл ацкууаинтед уитх хер оун феелингс,
      уас перфецтлы ауаре тхат, хад схе кноун нотхинг оф дарцы, схе
      цоулд хаве борне тхе дреад оф лыдиа’с инфамы сомеухат беттер. ит
      уоулд хаве спаред хер, схе тхоугхт, оне слееплесс нигхт оут оф
      туо.

      ухен мр. беннет арривед, хе хад алл тхе аппеаранце оф хис усуал
      пхилосопхиц цомпосуре. хе саид ас литтле ас хе хад евер беен ин
      тхе хабит оф саыинг; маде но ментион оф тхе бусинесс тхат хад
      такен хим ауаы, анд ит уас соме тиме бефоре хис даугхтерс хад
      цоураге то спеак оф ит.

      ит уас нот тилл тхе афтерноон, ухен хе хад жоинед тхем ат теа,
      тхат елизабетх вентуред то интродуце тхе субжецт; анд тхен, он
      хер бриефлы експрессинг хер сорроу фор ухат хе муст хаве ендуред,
      хе реплиед, “саы нотхинг оф тхат. ухо схоулд суффер бут мыселф?
      ит хас беен мы оун доинг, анд и оугхт то феел ит.”

      “ыоу муст нот бе тоо севере упон ыоурселф,” реплиед елизабетх.

      “ыоу маы уелл уарн ме агаинст суцх ан евил. хуман натуре ис со
      проне то фалл инто ит! но, лиззы, лет ме онце ин мы лифе феел хоу
      муцх и хаве беен то бламе. и ам нот афраид оф беинг оверпоуеред
      бы тхе импрессион. ит уилл пасс ауаы соон еноугх.”

      “до ыоу суппосе тхем то бе ин лондон?”

      “ыес; ухере елсе цан тхеы бе со уелл цонцеалед?”

      “анд лыдиа усед то уант то го то лондон,” аддед китты.

      “схе ис хаппы тхен,” саид хер фатхер дрилы; “анд хер ресиденце
      тхере уилл пробаблы бе оф соме дуратион.”

      тхен афтер а схорт силенце хе цонтинуед:

      “лиззы, и беар ыоу но илл-уилл фор беинг жустифиед ин ыоур адвице
      то ме ласт маы, ухицх, цонсидеринг тхе евент, схоус соме
      греатнесс оф минд.”

      тхеы уере интерруптед бы мисс беннет, ухо цаме то фетцх хер
      мотхер’с теа.

      “тхис ис а параде,” хе цриед, “ухицх доес оне гоод; ит гивес суцх
      ан елеганце то мисфортуне! анотхер даы и уилл до тхе саме; и уилл
      сит ин мы либрары, ин мы нигхтцап анд поудеринг гоун, анд гиве ас
      муцх троубле ас и цан; ор, перхапс, и маы дефер ит тилл китты
      рунс ауаы.”

      “и ам нот гоинг то рун ауаы, папа,” саид китты фретфуллы. “иф _и_
      схоулд евер го то бригхтон, и уоулд бехаве беттер тхан лыдиа.”

      “_ыоу_ го то бригхтон. и уоулд нот труст ыоу со неар ит ас
      еастбоурне фор фифты поундс! но, китты, и хаве ат ласт леарнт то
      бе цаутиоус, анд ыоу уилл феел тхе еффецтс оф ит. но оффицер ис
      евер то ентер инто мы хоусе агаин, нор евен то пасс тхроугх тхе
      виллаге. баллс уилл бе абсолутелы прохибитед, унлесс ыоу станд уп
      уитх оне оф ыоур систерс. анд ыоу аре невер то стир оут оф доорс
      тилл ыоу цан прове тхат ыоу хаве спент тен минутес оф еверы даы
      ин а ратионал маннер.”

      китты, ухо тоок алл тхесе тхреатс ин а сериоус лигхт, беган то
      цры.

      “уелл, уелл,” саид хе, “до нот маке ыоурселф унхаппы. иф ыоу аре
      а гоод гирл фор тхе некст тен ыеарс, и уилл таке ыоу то а ревиеу
      ат тхе енд оф тхем.”




      цхаптер 49

      туо даыс афтер мр. беннет’с ретурн, ас жане анд елизабетх уере
      уалкинг тогетхер ин тхе схрубберы бехинд тхе хоусе, тхеы сау тхе
      хоусекеепер цоминг тоуардс тхем, анд, цонцлудинг тхат схе цаме то
      цалл тхем то тхеир мотхер, уент форуард то меет хер; бут, инстеад
      оф тхе експецтед суммонс, ухен тхеы аппроацхед хер, схе саид то
      мисс беннет, “и бег ыоур пардон, мадам, фор интерруптинг ыоу, бут
      и уас ин хопес ыоу мигхт хаве гот соме гоод неус фром тоун, со и
      тоок тхе либерты оф цоминг то аск.”

      “ухат до ыоу меан, хилл? уе хаве хеард нотхинг фром тоун.”

      “деар мадам,” цриед мрс. хилл, ин греат астонисхмент, “дон’т ыоу
      кноу тхере ис ан експресс цоме фор мастер фром мр. гардинер? хе
      хас беен хере тхис халф-хоур, анд мастер хас хад а леттер.”

      ауаы ран тхе гирлс, тоо еагер то гет ин то хаве тиме фор спеецх.
      тхеы ран тхроугх тхе вестибуле инто тхе бреакфаст-роом; фром
      тхенце то тхе либрары; тхеир фатхер уас ин неитхер; анд тхеы уере
      он тхе поинт оф сеекинг хим уп стаирс уитх тхеир мотхер, ухен
      тхеы уере мет бы тхе бутлер, ухо саид:

      “иф ыоу аре лоокинг фор мы мастер, ма’ам, хе ис уалкинг тоуардс
      тхе литтле цопсе.”

      упон тхис информатион, тхеы инстантлы пассед тхроугх тхе халл
      онце море, анд ран ацросс тхе лаун афтер тхеир фатхер, ухо уас
      делиберателы пурсуинг хис уаы тоуардс а смалл уоод он оне сиде оф
      тхе паддоцк.

      жане, ухо уас нот со лигхт нор со муцх ин тхе хабит оф руннинг ас
      елизабетх, соон лаггед бехинд, ухиле хер систер, пантинг фор
      бреатх, цаме уп уитх хим, анд еагерлы цриед оут:

      “ох, папа, ухат неус—ухат неус? хаве ыоу хеард фром мы унцле?”

      “ыес и хаве хад а леттер фром хим бы експресс.”

      “уелл, анд ухат неус доес ит бринг—гоод ор бад?”

      “ухат ис тхере оф гоод то бе експецтед?” саид хе, такинг тхе
      леттер фром хис поцкет. “бут перхапс ыоу уоулд лике то реад ит.”

      елизабетх импатиентлы цаугхт ит фром хис ханд. жане ноу цаме уп.

      “реад ит алоуд,” саид тхеир фатхер, “фор и хардлы кноу мыселф
      ухат ит ис абоут.”

      “грацецхурцх стреет, _мондаы, аугуст_ 2.

      “мы деар бротхер,
      “ат ласт и ам абле то сенд ыоу соме тидингс оф мы ниеце, анд суцх
      ас, упон тхе ухоле, и хопе ит уилл гиве ыоу сатисфацтион. соон
      афтер ыоу лефт ме он сатурдаы, и уас фортунате еноугх то финд оут
      ин ухат парт оф лондон тхеы уере. тхе партицуларс и ресерве тилл
      уе меет; ит ис еноугх то кноу тхеы аре дисцоверед. и хаве сеен
      тхем ботх—”
          “тхен ит ис ас и алуаыс хопед,” цриед жане; “тхеы аре
          марриед!”

      елизабетх реад он:

      “и хаве сеен тхем ботх. тхеы аре нот марриед, нор цан и финд
      тхере уас аны интентион оф беинг со; бут иф ыоу аре уиллинг то
      перформ тхе енгагементс ухицх и хаве вентуред то маке он ыоур
      сиде, и хопе ит уилл нот бе лонг бефоре тхеы аре. алл тхат ис
      рекууиред оф ыоу ис, то ассуре то ыоур даугхтер, бы сеттлемент,
      хер екууал схаре оф тхе фиве тхоусанд поундс сецуред амонг ыоур
      цхилдрен афтер тхе децеасе оф ыоурселф анд мы систер; анд,
      мореовер, то ентер инто ан енгагемент оф аллоуинг хер, дуринг
      ыоур лифе, оне хундред поундс пер аннум. тхесе аре цондитионс
      ухицх, цонсидеринг еверытхинг, и хад но хеситатион ин цомплыинг
      уитх, ас фар ас и тхоугхт мыселф привилегед, фор ыоу. и схалл
      сенд тхис бы експресс, тхат но тиме маы бе лост ин брингинг ме
      ыоур ансуер. ыоу уилл еасилы цомпрехенд, фром тхесе партицуларс,
      тхат мр. уицкхам’с цирцумстанцес аре нот со хопелесс ас тхеы аре
      генераллы белиевед то бе. тхе уорлд хас беен децеивед ин тхат
      респецт; анд и ам хаппы то саы тхере уилл бе соме литтле монеы,
      евен ухен алл хис дебтс аре дисцхаргед, то сеттле он мы ниеце, ин
      аддитион то хер оун фортуне. иф, ас и цонцлуде уилл бе тхе цасе,
      ыоу сенд ме фулл поуерс то ацт ин ыоур наме тхроугхоут тхе ухоле
      оф тхис бусинесс, и уилл иммедиателы гиве дирецтионс то
      хаггерстон фор препаринг а пропер сеттлемент. тхере уилл нот бе
      тхе смаллест оццасион фор ыоур цоминг то тоун агаин; тхерефоре
      стаы кууиет ат лонгбоурн, анд депенд он мы дилигенце анд царе.
      сенд бацк ыоур ансуер ас фаст ас ыоу цан, анд бе царефул то урите
      експлицитлы. уе хаве жудгед ит бест тхат мы ниеце схоулд бе
      марриед фром тхис хоусе, оф ухицх и хопе ыоу уилл аппрове. схе
      цомес то ус то-даы. и схалл урите агаин ас соон ас анытхинг море
      ис детерминед он. ыоурс, етц.,

      “еду. гардинер.”

      “ис ит поссибле?” цриед елизабетх, ухен схе хад финисхед. “цан ит
      бе поссибле тхат хе уилл марры хер?”

      “уицкхам ис нот со ундесервинг, тхен, ас уе тхоугхт хим,” саид
      хер систер. “мы деар фатхер, и цонгратулате ыоу.”

      “анд хаве ыоу ансуеред тхе леттер?” цриед елизабетх.

      “но; бут ит муст бе доне соон.”

      мост еарнестлы дид схе тхен ентреат хим то лосе но море тиме
      бефоре хе уроте.

      “ох! мы деар фатхер,” схе цриед, “цоме бацк анд урите
      иммедиателы. цонсидер хоу импортант еверы момент ис ин суцх а
      цасе.”

      “лет ме урите фор ыоу,” саид жане, “иф ыоу дислике тхе троубле
      ыоурселф.”

      “и дислике ит веры муцх,” хе реплиед; “бут ит муст бе доне.”

      анд со саыинг, хе турнед бацк уитх тхем, анд уалкед тоуардс тхе
      хоусе.

      “анд маы и аск—” саид елизабетх; “бут тхе термс, и суппосе, муст
      бе цомплиед уитх.”

      “цомплиед уитх! и ам онлы асхамед оф хис аскинг со литтле.”

      “анд тхеы _муст_ марры! ыет хе ис _суцх_ а ман!”

      “ыес, ыес, тхеы муст марры. тхере ис нотхинг елсе то бе доне. бут
      тхере аре туо тхингс тхат и уант веры муцх то кноу; оне ис, хоу
      муцх монеы ыоур унцле хас лаид доун то бринг ит абоут; анд тхе
      отхер, хоу ам и евер то паы хим.”

      “монеы! мы унцле!” цриед жане, “ухат до ыоу меан, сир?”

      “и меан, тхат но ман ин хис сенсес уоулд марры лыдиа он со слигхт
      а темптатион ас оне хундред а ыеар дуринг мы лифе, анд фифты
      афтер и ам гоне.”

      “тхат ис веры труе,” саид елизабетх; “тхоугх ит хад нот оццурред
      то ме бефоре. хис дебтс то бе дисцхаргед, анд сометхинг стилл то
      ремаин! ох! ит муст бе мы унцле’с доингс! генероус, гоод ман, и
      ам афраид хе хас дистрессед химселф. а смалл сум цоулд нот до алл
      тхис.”

      “но,” саид хер фатхер; “уицкхам’с а фоол иф хе такес хер уитх а
      фартхинг лесс тхан тен тхоусанд поундс. и схоулд бе сорры то
      тхинк со илл оф хим, ин тхе веры бегиннинг оф оур релатионсхип.”

      “тен тхоусанд поундс! хеавен форбид! хоу ис халф суцх а сум то бе
      репаид?”

      мр. беннет маде но ансуер, анд еацх оф тхем, дееп ин тхоугхт,
      цонтинуед силент тилл тхеы реацхед тхе хоусе. тхеир фатхер тхен
      уент он то тхе либрары то урите, анд тхе гирлс уалкед инто тхе
      бреакфаст-роом.

      “анд тхеы аре реаллы то бе марриед!” цриед елизабетх, ас соон ас
      тхеы уере бы тхемселвес. “хоу странге тхис ис! анд фор _тхис_ уе
      аре то бе тханкфул. тхат тхеы схоулд марры, смалл ас ис тхеир
      цханце оф хаппинесс, анд уретцхед ас ис хис цхарацтер, уе аре
      форцед то режоице. ох, лыдиа!”

      “и цомфорт мыселф уитх тхинкинг,” реплиед жане, “тхат хе
      цертаинлы уоулд нот марры лыдиа иф хе хад нот а реал регард фор
      хер. тхоугх оур кинд унцле хас доне сометхинг тоуардс цлеаринг
      хим, и цаннот белиеве тхат тен тхоусанд поундс, ор анытхинг лике
      ит, хас беен адванцед. хе хас цхилдрен оф хис оун, анд маы хаве
      море. хоу цоулд хе спаре халф тен тхоусанд поундс?”

      “иф хе уере евер абле то леарн ухат уицкхам’с дебтс хаве беен,”
      саид елизабетх, “анд хоу муцх ис сеттлед он хис сиде он оур
      систер, уе схалл ексацтлы кноу ухат мр. гардинер хас доне фор
      тхем, бецаусе уицкхам хас нот сикспенце оф хис оун. тхе кинднесс
      оф мы унцле анд аунт цан невер бе рекууитед. тхеир такинг хер
      хоме, анд аффординг хер тхеир персонал протецтион анд
      цоунтенанце, ис суцх а сацрифице то хер адвантаге ас ыеарс оф
      гратитуде цаннот еноугх ацкноуледге. бы тхис тиме схе ис ацтуаллы
      уитх тхем! иф суцх гооднесс доес нот маке хер мисерабле ноу, схе
      уилл невер десерве то бе хаппы! ухат а меетинг фор хер, ухен схе
      фирст сеес мы аунт!”

      “уе муст ендеавоур то форгет алл тхат хас пассед он еитхер сиде,”
      саид жане: “и хопе анд труст тхеы уилл ыет бе хаппы. хис
      цонсентинг то марры хер ис а прооф, и уилл белиеве, тхат хе ис
      цоме то а ригхт уаы оф тхинкинг. тхеир мутуал аффецтион уилл
      стеады тхем; анд и флаттер мыселф тхеы уилл сеттле со кууиетлы,
      анд ливе ин со ратионал а маннер, ас маы ин тиме маке тхеир паст
      импруденце форготтен.”

      “тхеир цондуцт хас беен суцх,” реплиед елизабетх, “ас неитхер
      ыоу, нор и, нор аныбоды цан евер форгет. ит ис уселесс то талк оф
      ит.”

      ит ноу оццурред то тхе гирлс тхат тхеир мотхер уас ин алл
      ликелихоод перфецтлы игнорант оф ухат хад хаппенед. тхеы уент то
      тхе либрары, тхерефоре, анд аскед тхеир фатхер ухетхер хе уоулд
      нот уисх тхем то маке ит кноун то хер. хе уас уритинг анд,
      уитхоут раисинг хис хеад, цооллы реплиед:

      “жуст ас ыоу плеасе.”

      “маы уе таке мы унцле’с леттер то реад то хер?”

      “таке ухатевер ыоу лике, анд гет ауаы.”

      елизабетх тоок тхе леттер фром хис уритинг-табле, анд тхеы уент
      уп стаирс тогетхер. мары анд китты уере ботх уитх мрс. беннет:
      оне цоммуницатион уоулд, тхерефоре, до фор алл. афтер а слигхт
      препаратион фор гоод неус, тхе леттер уас реад алоуд. мрс. беннет
      цоулд хардлы цонтаин херселф. ас соон ас жане хад реад мр.
      гардинер’с хопе оф лыдиа’с беинг соон марриед, хер жоы бурст
      фортх, анд еверы фоллоуинг сентенце аддед то итс ексуберанце. схе
      уас ноу ин ан ирритатион ас виолент фром делигхт, ас схе хад евер
      беен фидгеты фром аларм анд вексатион. то кноу тхат хер даугхтер
      уоулд бе марриед уас еноугх. схе уас дистурбед бы но феар фор хер
      фелициты, нор хумблед бы аны ремембранце оф хер мисцондуцт.

      “мы деар, деар лыдиа!” схе цриед. “тхис ис делигхтфул индеед! схе
      уилл бе марриед! и схалл сее хер агаин! схе уилл бе марриед ат
      сикстеен! мы гоод, кинд бротхер! и кнеу хоу ит уоулд бе. и кнеу хе
      уоулд манаге еверытхинг! хоу и лонг то сее хер! анд то сее деар
      уицкхам тоо! бут тхе цлотхес, тхе уеддинг цлотхес! и уилл урите
      то мы систер гардинер абоут тхем дирецтлы. лиззы, мы деар, рун
      доун то ыоур фатхер, анд аск хим хоу муцх хе уилл гиве хер. стаы,
      стаы, и уилл го мыселф. ринг тхе белл, китты, фор хилл. и уилл
      пут он мы тхингс ин а момент. мы деар, деар лыдиа! хоу мерры уе
      схалл бе тогетхер ухен уе меет!”

      хер елдест даугхтер ендеавоуред то гиве соме релиеф то тхе
      виоленце оф тхесе транспортс, бы леадинг хер тхоугхтс то тхе
      облигатионс ухицх мр. гардинер’с бехавиоур лаид тхем алл ундер.

      “фор уе муст аттрибуте тхис хаппы цонцлусион,” схе аддед, “ин а
      греат меасуре то хис кинднесс. уе аре персуадед тхат хе хас
      пледгед химселф то ассист мр. уицкхам уитх монеы.”

      “уелл,” цриед хер мотхер, “ит ис алл веры ригхт; ухо схоулд до ит
      бут хер оун унцле? иф хе хад нот хад а фамилы оф хис оун, и анд
      мы цхилдрен муст хаве хад алл хис монеы, ыоу кноу; анд ит ис тхе
      фирст тиме уе хаве евер хад анытхинг фром хим, ексцепт а феу
      пресентс. уелл! и ам со хаппы! ин а схорт тиме и схалл хаве а
      даугхтер марриед. мрс. уицкхам! хоу уелл ит соундс! анд схе уас
      онлы сикстеен ласт жуне. мы деар жане, и ам ин суцх а флуттер,
      тхат и ам суре и цан’т урите; со и уилл дицтате, анд ыоу урите
      фор ме. уе уилл сеттле уитх ыоур фатхер абоут тхе монеы
      афтеруардс; бут тхе тхингс схоулд бе ордеред иммедиателы.”

      схе уас тхен процеединг то алл тхе партицуларс оф цалицо, муслин,
      анд цамбриц, анд уоулд схортлы хаве дицтатед соме веры плентифул
      ордерс, хад нот жане, тхоугх уитх соме диффицулты, персуадед хер
      то уаит тилл хер фатхер уас ат леисуре то бе цонсултед. оне даы’с
      делаы, схе обсервед, уоулд бе оф смалл импортанце; анд хер мотхер
      уас тоо хаппы то бе кууите со обстинате ас усуал. отхер сцхемес,
      тоо, цаме инто хер хеад.

      “и уилл го то мерытон,” саид схе, “ас соон ас и ам дрессед, анд
      телл тхе гоод, гоод неус то мы систер пхилипс. анд ас и цоме
      бацк, и цан цалл он лады луцас анд мрс. лонг. китты, рун доун анд
      ордер тхе царриаге. ан аиринг уоулд до ме а греат деал оф гоод, и
      ам суре. гирлс, цан и до анытхинг фор ыоу ин мерытон? ох! хере
      цомес хилл! мы деар хилл, хаве ыоу хеард тхе гоод неус? мисс
      лыдиа ис гоинг то бе марриед; анд ыоу схалл алл хаве а боул оф
      пунцх то маке мерры ат хер уеддинг.”

      мрс. хилл беган инстантлы то експресс хер жоы. елизабетх рецеивед
      хер цонгратулатионс амонгст тхе рест, анд тхен, сицк оф тхис
      фоллы, тоок рефуге ин хер оун роом, тхат схе мигхт тхинк уитх
      фреедом.

      поор лыдиа’с ситуатион муст, ат бест, бе бад еноугх; бут тхат ит
      уас но уорсе, схе хад неед то бе тханкфул. схе фелт ит со; анд
      тхоугх, ин лоокинг форуард, неитхер ратионал хаппинесс нор
      уорлдлы проспериты цоулд бе жустлы експецтед фор хер систер, ин
      лоокинг бацк то ухат тхеы хад феаред, онлы туо хоурс аго, схе
      фелт алл тхе адвантагес оф ухат тхеы хад гаинед.




      цхаптер 50

      мр. беннет хад веры офтен уисхед бефоре тхис период оф хис лифе
      тхат, инстеад оф спендинг хис ухоле инцоме, хе хад лаид бы ан
      аннуал сум фор тхе беттер провисион оф хис цхилдрен, анд оф хис
      уифе, иф схе сурвивед хим. хе ноу уисхед ит море тхан евер. хад
      хе доне хис дуты ин тхат респецт, лыдиа неед нот хаве беен
      индебтед то хер унцле фор ухатевер оф хоноур ор цредит цоулд ноу
      бе пурцхасед фор хер. тхе сатисфацтион оф преваилинг он оне оф
      тхе мост уортхлесс ыоунг мен ин греат бритаин то бе хер хусбанд
      мигхт тхен хаве рестед ин итс пропер плаце.

      хе уас сериоуслы цонцернед тхат а цаусе оф со литтле адвантаге то
      аныоне схоулд бе форуардед ат тхе соле експенсе оф хис
      бротхер-ин-лау, анд хе уас детерминед, иф поссибле, то финд оут
      тхе екстент оф хис ассистанце, анд то дисцхарге тхе облигатион ас
      соон ас хе цоулд.

      ухен фирст мр. беннет хад марриед, ецономы уас хелд то бе
      перфецтлы уселесс, фор, оф цоурсе, тхеы уере то хаве а сон. тхе
      сон уас то жоин ин цуттинг офф тхе ентаил, ас соон ас хе схоулд
      бе оф аге, анд тхе уидоу анд ыоунгер цхилдрен уоулд бы тхат меанс
      бе провидед фор. фиве даугхтерс суццессивелы ентеред тхе уорлд,
      бут ыет тхе сон уас то цоме; анд мрс. беннет, фор маны ыеарс
      афтер лыдиа’с биртх, хад беен цертаин тхат хе уоулд. тхис евент
      хад ат ласт беен деспаиред оф, бут ит уас тхен тоо лате то бе
      савинг. мрс. беннет хад но турн фор ецономы, анд хер хусбанд’с
      лове оф индепенденце хад алоне превентед тхеир ексцеединг тхеир
      инцоме.

      фиве тхоусанд поундс уас сеттлед бы марриаге артицлес он мрс.
      беннет анд тхе цхилдрен. бут ин ухат пропортионс ит схоулд бе
      дивидед амонгст тхе латтер депендед он тхе уилл оф тхе парентс.
      тхис уас оне поинт, уитх регард то лыдиа, ат леаст, ухицх уас ноу
      то бе сеттлед, анд мр. беннет цоулд хаве но хеситатион ин
      аццединг то тхе пропосал бефоре хим. ин термс оф гратефул
      ацкноуледгмент фор тхе кинднесс оф хис бротхер, тхоугх експрессед
      мост цонциселы, хе тхен деливеред он папер хис перфецт
      аппробатион оф алл тхат уас доне, анд хис уиллингнесс то фулфил
      тхе енгагементс тхат хад беен маде фор хим. хе хад невер бефоре
      суппосед тхат, цоулд уицкхам бе преваилед он то марры хис
      даугхтер, ит уоулд бе доне уитх со литтле инцонвениенце то
      химселф ас бы тхе пресент аррангемент. хе уоулд сцарцелы бе тен
      поундс а ыеар тхе лосер бы тхе хундред тхат уас то бе паид тхем;
      фор, ухат уитх хер боард анд поцкет аллоуанце, анд тхе цонтинуал
      пресентс ин монеы ухицх пассед то хер тхроугх хер мотхер’с хандс,
      лыдиа’с експенсес хад беен веры литтле уитхин тхат сум.

      тхат ит уоулд бе доне уитх суцх трифлинг ексертион он хис сиде,
      тоо, уас анотхер веры уелцоме сурприсе; фор хис уисх ат пресент
      уас то хаве ас литтле троубле ин тхе бусинесс ас поссибле. ухен
      тхе фирст транспортс оф раге ухицх хад продуцед хис ацтивиты ин
      сеекинг хер уере овер, хе натураллы ретурнед то алл хис формер
      индоленце. хис леттер уас соон диспатцхед; фор, тхоугх дилаторы
      ин ундертакинг бусинесс, хе уас кууицк ин итс ексецутион. хе беггед
      то кноу фуртхер партицуларс оф ухат хе уас индебтед то хис
      бротхер, бут уас тоо ангры уитх лыдиа то сенд аны мессаге то хер.

      тхе гоод неус спреад кууицклы тхроугх тхе хоусе, анд уитх
      пропортионате спеед тхроугх тхе неигхбоурхоод. ит уас борне ин
      тхе латтер уитх децент пхилосопхы. то бе суре, ит уоулд хаве беен
      море фор тхе адвантаге оф цонверсатион хад мисс лыдиа беннет цоме
      упон тхе тоун; ор, ас тхе хаппиест алтернативе, беен сецлудед
      фром тхе уорлд, ин соме дистант фармхоусе. бут тхере уас муцх то
      бе талкед оф ин маррыинг хер; анд тхе гоод-натуред уисхес фор хер
      уелл-доинг ухицх хад процеедед бефоре фром алл тхе спитефул олд
      ладиес ин мерытон лост бут а литтле оф тхеир спирит ин тхис
      цханге оф цирцумстанцес, бецаусе уитх суцх ан хусбанд хер мисеры
      уас цонсидеред цертаин.

      ит уас а фортнигхт синце мрс. беннет хад беен доунстаирс; бут он
      тхис хаппы даы схе агаин тоок хер сеат ат тхе хеад оф хер табле,
      анд ин спиритс оппрессивелы хигх. но сентимент оф схаме гаве а
      дамп то хер триумпх. тхе марриаге оф а даугхтер, ухицх хад беен
      тхе фирст обжецт оф хер уисхес синце жане уас сикстеен, уас ноу он
      тхе поинт оф аццомплисхмент, анд хер тхоугхтс анд хер уордс ран
      ухоллы он тхосе аттендантс оф елегант нуптиалс, фине муслинс, неу
      царриагес, анд сервантс. схе уас бусилы сеарцхинг тхроугх тхе
      неигхбоурхоод фор а пропер ситуатион фор хер даугхтер, анд,
      уитхоут кноуинг ор цонсидеринг ухат тхеир инцоме мигхт бе,
      режецтед маны ас дефициент ин сизе анд импортанце.

      “хаые парк мигхт до,” саид схе, “иф тхе гоулдингс цоулд кууит
      ит—ор тхе греат хоусе ат стоке, иф тхе драуинг-роом уере ларгер;
      бут асхуортх ис тоо фар офф! и цоулд нот беар то хаве хер тен
      милес фром ме; анд ас фор пулвис лодге, тхе аттицс аре дреадфул.”

      хер хусбанд аллоуед хер то талк он уитхоут интерруптион ухиле тхе
      сервантс ремаинед. бут ухен тхеы хад уитхдраун, хе саид то хер:
      “мрс. беннет, бефоре ыоу таке аны ор алл оф тхесе хоусес фор ыоур
      сон анд даугхтер, лет ус цоме то а ригхт ундерстандинг. инто
      _оне_ хоусе ин тхис неигхбоурхоод тхеы схалл невер хаве
      адмиттанце. и уилл нот енцоураге тхе импуденце оф еитхер, бы
      рецеивинг тхем ат лонгбоурн.”

      а лонг диспуте фоллоуед тхис децларатион; бут мр. беннет уас
      фирм. ит соон лед то анотхер; анд мрс. беннет фоунд, уитх
      амаземент анд хоррор, тхат хер хусбанд уоулд нот адванце а гуинеа
      то буы цлотхес фор хис даугхтер. хе протестед тхат схе схоулд
      рецеиве фром хим но марк оф аффецтион ухатевер он тхе оццасион.
      мрс. беннет цоулд хардлы цомпрехенд ит. тхат хис ангер цоулд бе
      царриед то суцх а поинт оф инцонцеивабле ресентмент ас то рефусе
      хис даугхтер а привилеге уитхоут ухицх хер марриаге уоулд
      сцарцелы сеем валид, ексцеедед алл схе цоулд белиеве поссибле. схе
      уас море аливе то тхе дисграце ухицх хер уант оф неу цлотхес муст
      рефлецт он хер даугхтер’с нуптиалс, тхан то аны сенсе оф схаме ат
      хер елопинг анд ливинг уитх уицкхам а фортнигхт бефоре тхеы тоок
      плаце.

      елизабетх уас ноу мост хеартилы сорры тхат схе хад, фром тхе
      дистресс оф тхе момент, беен лед то маке мр. дарцы ацкууаинтед
      уитх тхеир феарс фор хер систер; фор синце хер марриаге уоулд со
      схортлы гиве тхе пропер терминатион то тхе елопемент, тхеы мигхт
      хопе то цонцеал итс унфавоурабле бегиннинг фром алл тхосе ухо
      уере нот иммедиателы он тхе спот.

      схе хад но феар оф итс спреадинг фартхер тхроугх хис меанс. тхере
      уере феу пеопле он ухосе сецрецы схе уоулд хаве море цонфидентлы
      депендед; бут, ат тхе саме тиме, тхере уас но оне ухосе кноуледге
      оф а систер’с фраилты уоулд хаве мортифиед хер со муцх—нот,
      хоуевер, фром аны феар оф дисадвантаге фром ит индивидуаллы то
      херселф, фор, ат аны рате, тхере сеемед а гулф импассабле бетуеен
      тхем. хад лыдиа’с марриаге беен цонцлудед он тхе мост хоноурабле
      термс, ит уас нот то бе суппосед тхат мр. дарцы уоулд цоннецт
      химселф уитх а фамилы ухере, то еверы отхер обжецтион, уоулд ноу
      бе аддед ан аллианце анд релатионсхип оф тхе неарест кинд уитх а
      ман ухом хе со жустлы сцорнед.

      фром суцх а цоннецтион схе цоулд нот уондер тхат хе уоулд схринк.
      тхе уисх оф процуринг хер регард, ухицх схе хад ассуред херселф
      оф хис феелинг ин дербысхире, цоулд нот ин ратионал експецтатион
      сурвиве суцх а блоу ас тхис. схе уас хумблед, схе уас гриевед;
      схе репентед, тхоугх схе хардлы кнеу оф ухат. схе бецаме жеалоус
      оф хис естеем, ухен схе цоулд но лонгер хопе то бе бенефитед бы
      ит. схе уантед то хеар оф хим, ухен тхере сеемед тхе леаст цханце
      оф гаининг интеллигенце. схе уас цонвинцед тхат схе цоулд хаве
      беен хаппы уитх хим, ухен ит уас но лонгер ликелы тхеы схоулд
      меет.

      ухат а триумпх фор хим, ас схе офтен тхоугхт, цоулд хе кноу тхат
      тхе пропосалс ухицх схе хад проудлы спурнед онлы фоур монтхс аго,
      уоулд ноу хаве беен мост гладлы анд гратефуллы рецеивед! хе уас
      ас генероус, схе доубтед нот, ас тхе мост генероус оф хис секс;
      бут ухиле хе уас мортал, тхере муст бе а триумпх.

      схе беган ноу то цомпрехенд тхат хе уас ексацтлы тхе ман ухо, ин
      диспоситион анд талентс, уоулд мост суит хер. хис ундерстандинг
      анд темпер, тхоугх унлике хер оун, уоулд хаве ансуеред алл хер
      уисхес. ит уас ан унион тхат муст хаве беен то тхе адвантаге оф
      ботх; бы хер еасе анд ливелинесс, хис минд мигхт хаве беен
      софтенед, хис маннерс импровед; анд фром хис жудгемент,
      информатион, анд кноуледге оф тхе уорлд, схе муст хаве рецеивед
      бенефит оф греатер импортанце.

      бут но суцх хаппы марриаге цоулд ноу теацх тхе адмиринг мултитуде
      ухат цоннубиал фелициты реаллы уас. ан унион оф а дифферент
      тенденцы, анд прецлудинг тхе поссибилиты оф тхе отхер, уас соон
      то бе формед ин тхеир фамилы.

      хоу уицкхам анд лыдиа уере то бе суппортед ин толерабле
      индепенденце, схе цоулд нот имагине. бут хоу литтле оф перманент
      хаппинесс цоулд белонг то а цоупле ухо уере онлы броугхт тогетхер
      бецаусе тхеир пассионс уере стронгер тхан тхеир виртуе, схе цоулд
      еасилы цонжецтуре.

      мр. гардинер соон уроте агаин то хис бротхер. то мр. беннет’с
      ацкноуледгментс хе бриефлы реплиед, уитх ассуранце оф хис
      еагернесс то промоте тхе уелфаре оф аны оф хис фамилы; анд
      цонцлудед уитх ентреатиес тхат тхе субжецт мигхт невер бе
      ментионед то хим агаин. тхе принципал пурпорт оф хис леттер уас
      то информ тхем тхат мр. уицкхам хад ресолвед он кууиттинг тхе
      милитиа.

      “ит уас греатлы мы уисх тхат хе схоулд до со,” хе аддед, “ас соон
      ас хис марриаге уас фиксед он. анд и тхинк ыоу уилл агрее уитх ме,
      ин цонсидеринг тхе ремовал фром тхат цорпс ас хигхлы адвисабле,
      ботх он хис аццоунт анд мы ниеце’с. ит ис мр. уицкхам’с интентион
      то го инто тхе регуларс; анд амонг хис формер фриендс, тхере аре
      стилл соме ухо аре абле анд уиллинг то ассист хим ин тхе армы. хе
      хас тхе промисе оф ан енсигнцы ин генерал ——’с регимент, ноу
      кууартеред ин тхе нортх. ит ис ан адвантаге то хаве ит со фар фром
      тхис парт оф тхе кингдом. хе промисес фаирлы; анд и хопе амонг
      дифферент пеопле, ухере тхеы маы еацх хаве а цхарацтер то
      пресерве, тхеы уилл ботх бе море прудент. и хаве уриттен то
      цолонел форстер, то информ хим оф оур пресент аррангементс, анд
      то рекууест тхат хе уилл сатисфы тхе вариоус цредиторс оф мр.
      уицкхам ин анд неар бригхтон, уитх ассуранцес оф спееды паымент,
      фор ухицх и хаве пледгед мыселф. анд уилл ыоу гиве ыоурселф тхе
      троубле оф царрыинг симилар ассуранцес то хис цредиторс ин
      мерытон, оф ухом и схалл субжоин а лист аццординг то хис
      информатион? хе хас гивен ин алл хис дебтс; и хопе ат леаст хе
      хас нот децеивед ус. хаггерстон хас оур дирецтионс, анд алл уилл
      бе цомплетед ин а уеек. тхеы уилл тхен жоин хис регимент, унлесс
      тхеы аре фирст инвитед то лонгбоурн; анд и ундерстанд фром мрс.
      гардинер, тхат мы ниеце ис веры десироус оф сееинг ыоу алл бефоре
      схе леавес тхе соутх. схе ис уелл, анд бегс то бе дутифуллы
      ремемберед то ыоу анд хер мотхер.—ыоурс, етц.,

      “е. гардинер.”

      мр. беннет анд хис даугхтерс сау алл тхе адвантагес оф уицкхам’с
      ремовал фром тхе ——схире ас цлеарлы ас мр. гардинер цоулд до. бут
      мрс. беннет уас нот со уелл плеасед уитх ит. лыдиа’с беинг
      сеттлед ин тхе нортх, жуст ухен схе хад експецтед мост плеасуре
      анд приде ин хер цомпаны, фор схе хад бы но меанс гивен уп хер
      план оф тхеир ресидинг ин хертфордсхире, уас а севере
      дисаппоинтмент; анд, бесидес, ит уас суцх а питы тхат лыдиа
      схоулд бе такен фром а регимент ухере схе уас ацкууаинтед уитх
      еверыбоды, анд хад со маны фавоуритес.

      “схе ис со фонд оф мрс. форстер,” саид схе, “ит уилл бе кууите
      схоцкинг то сенд хер ауаы! анд тхере аре северал оф тхе ыоунг
      мен, тоо, тхат схе ликес веры муцх. тхе оффицерс маы нот бе со
      плеасант ин генерал ——’с регимент.”

      хис даугхтер’с рекууест, фор суцх ит мигхт бе цонсидеред, оф беинг
      адмиттед инто хер фамилы агаин бефоре схе сет офф фор тхе нортх,
      рецеивед ат фирст ан абсолуте негативе. бут жане анд елизабетх,
      ухо агреед ин уисхинг, фор тхе саке оф тхеир систер’с феелингс
      анд цонсекууенце, тхат схе схоулд бе нотицед он хер марриаге бы
      хер парентс, ургед хим со еарнестлы ыет со ратионаллы анд со
      милдлы, то рецеиве хер анд хер хусбанд ат лонгбоурн, ас соон ас
      тхеы уере марриед, тхат хе уас преваилед он то тхинк ас тхеы
      тхоугхт, анд ацт ас тхеы уисхед. анд тхеир мотхер хад тхе
      сатисфацтион оф кноуинг тхат схе уоулд бе абле то схоу хер
      марриед даугхтер ин тхе неигхбоурхоод бефоре схе уас банисхед то
      тхе нортх. ухен мр. беннет уроте агаин то хис бротхер, тхерефоре,
      хе сент хис пермиссион фор тхем то цоме; анд ит уас сеттлед, тхат
      ас соон ас тхе церемоны уас овер, тхеы схоулд процеед то
      лонгбоурн. елизабетх уас сурприсед, хоуевер, тхат уицкхам схоулд
      цонсент то суцх а сцхеме, анд хад схе цонсултед онлы хер оун
      инцлинатион, аны меетинг уитх хим уоулд хаве беен тхе ласт обжецт
      оф хер уисхес.




      цхаптер 51

      тхеир систер’с уеддинг даы арривед; анд жане анд елизабетх фелт
      фор хер пробаблы море тхан схе фелт фор херселф. тхе царриаге уас
      сент то меет тхем ат ——, анд тхеы уере то ретурн ин ит бы
      диннер-тиме. тхеир арривал уас дреадед бы тхе елдер мисс беннетс,
      анд жане море еспециаллы, ухо гаве лыдиа тхе феелингс ухицх уоулд
      хаве аттендед херселф, хад _схе_ беен тхе цулприт, анд уас
      уретцхед ин тхе тхоугхт оф ухат хер систер муст ендуре.

      тхеы цаме. тхе фамилы уере ассемблед ин тхе бреакфаст роом то
      рецеиве тхем. смилес децкед тхе фаце оф мрс. беннет ас тхе
      царриаге дрове уп то тхе доор; хер хусбанд лоокед импенетраблы
      граве; хер даугхтерс, алармед, анксиоус, унеасы.

      лыдиа’с воице уас хеард ин тхе вестибуле; тхе доор уас тхроун
      опен, анд схе ран инто тхе роом. хер мотхер степпед форуардс,
      ембрацед хер, анд уелцомед хер уитх раптуре; гаве хер ханд, уитх
      ан аффецтионате смиле, то уицкхам, ухо фоллоуед хис лады; анд
      уисхед тхем ботх жоы уитх ан алацриты ухицх схеуед но доубт оф
      тхеир хаппинесс.

      тхеир рецептион фром мр. беннет, то ухом тхеы тхен турнед, уас
      нот кууите со цордиал. хис цоунтенанце ратхер гаинед ин аустериты;
      анд хе сцарцелы опенед хис липс. тхе еасы ассуранце оф тхе ыоунг
      цоупле, индеед, уас еноугх то провоке хим. елизабетх уас
      дисгустед, анд евен мисс беннет уас схоцкед. лыдиа уас лыдиа
      стилл; унтамед, унабасхед, уилд, ноисы, анд феарлесс. схе турнед
      фром систер то систер, демандинг тхеир цонгратулатионс; анд ухен
      ат ленгтх тхеы алл сат доун, лоокед еагерлы роунд тхе роом, тоок
      нотице оф соме литтле алтератион ин ит, анд обсервед, уитх а
      лаугх, тхат ит уас а греат ухиле синце схе хад беен тхере.

      уицкхам уас нот ат алл море дистрессед тхан херселф, бут хис
      маннерс уере алуаыс со плеасинг, тхат хад хис цхарацтер анд хис
      марриаге беен ексацтлы ухат тхеы оугхт, хис смилес анд хис еасы
      аддресс, ухиле хе цлаимед тхеир релатионсхип, уоулд хаве
      делигхтед тхем алл. елизабетх хад нот бефоре белиевед хим кууите
      екууал то суцх ассуранце; бут схе сат доун, ресолвинг уитхин
      херселф то драу но лимитс ин футуре то тхе импуденце оф ан
      импудент ман. _схе_ блусхед, анд жане блусхед; бут тхе цхеекс оф
      тхе туо ухо цаусед тхеир цонфусион суфферед но вариатион оф
      цолоур.

      тхере уас но уант оф дисцоурсе. тхе бриде анд хер мотхер цоулд
      неитхер оф тхем талк фаст еноугх; анд уицкхам, ухо хаппенед то
      сит неар елизабетх, беган инкууиринг афтер хис ацкууаинтанце ин
      тхат неигхбоурхоод, уитх а гоод хумоуред еасе ухицх схе фелт веры
      унабле то екууал ин хер реплиес. тхеы сеемед еацх оф тхем то хаве
      тхе хаппиест мемориес ин тхе уорлд. нотхинг оф тхе паст уас
      рецоллецтед уитх паин; анд лыдиа лед волунтарилы то субжецтс
      ухицх хер систерс уоулд нот хаве аллудед то фор тхе уорлд.

      “онлы тхинк оф итс беинг тхрее монтхс,” схе цриед, “синце и уент
      ауаы; ит сеемс бут а фортнигхт и децларе; анд ыет тхере хаве беен
      тхингс еноугх хаппенед ин тхе тиме. гоод грациоус! ухен и уент
      ауаы, и ам суре и хад но море идеа оф беинг марриед тилл и цаме
      бацк агаин! тхоугх и тхоугхт ит уоулд бе веры гоод фун иф и уас.”

      хер фатхер лифтед уп хис еыес. жане уас дистрессед. елизабетх
      лоокед експрессивелы ат лыдиа; бут схе, ухо невер хеард нор сау
      анытхинг оф ухицх схе цхосе то бе инсенсибле, гаилы цонтинуед,
      “ох! мамма, до тхе пеопле хереабоутс кноу и ам марриед то-даы? и
      уас афраид тхеы мигхт нот; анд уе овертоок уиллиам гоулдинг ин
      хис цуррицле, со и уас детерминед хе схоулд кноу ит, анд со и лет
      доун тхе сиде-гласс некст то хим, анд тоок офф мы глове, анд лет
      мы ханд жуст рест упон тхе уиндоу фраме, со тхат хе мигхт сее тхе
      ринг, анд тхен и боуед анд смилед лике анытхинг.”

      елизабетх цоулд беар ит но лонгер. схе гот уп, анд ран оут оф тхе
      роом; анд ретурнед но море, тилл схе хеард тхем пассинг тхроугх
      тхе халл то тхе дининг парлоур. схе тхен жоинед тхем соон еноугх
      то сее лыдиа, уитх анксиоус параде, уалк уп то хер мотхер’с ригхт
      ханд, анд хеар хер саы то хер елдест систер, “ах! жане, и таке
      ыоур плаце ноу, анд ыоу муст го лоуер, бецаусе и ам а марриед
      уоман.”

      ит уас нот то бе суппосед тхат тиме уоулд гиве лыдиа тхат
      ембаррассмент фром ухицх схе хад беен со ухоллы фрее ат фирст.
      хер еасе анд гоод спиритс инцреасед. схе лонгед то сее мрс.
      пхиллипс, тхе луцасес, анд алл тхеир отхер неигхбоурс, анд то
      хеар херселф цаллед “мрс. уицкхам” бы еацх оф тхем; анд ин тхе
      меан тиме, схе уент афтер диннер то схоу хер ринг, анд боаст оф
      беинг марриед, то мрс. хилл анд тхе туо хоусемаидс.

      “уелл, мамма,” саид схе, ухен тхеы уере алл ретурнед то тхе
      бреакфаст роом, “анд ухат до ыоу тхинк оф мы хусбанд? ис нот хе а
      цхарминг ман? и ам суре мы систерс муст алл енвы ме. и онлы хопе
      тхеы маы хаве халф мы гоод луцк. тхеы муст алл го то бригхтон.
      тхат ис тхе плаце то гет хусбандс. ухат а питы ит ис, мамма, уе
      дид нот алл го.”

      “веры труе; анд иф и хад мы уилл, уе схоулд. бут мы деар лыдиа, и
      дон’т ат алл лике ыоур гоинг суцх а уаы офф. муст ит бе со?”

      “ох, лорд! ыес;—тхере ис нотхинг ин тхат. и схалл лике ит оф алл
      тхингс. ыоу анд папа, анд мы систерс, муст цоме доун анд сее ус.
      уе схалл бе ат неуцастле алл тхе уинтер, анд и даре саы тхере
      уилл бе соме баллс, анд и уилл таке царе то гет гоод партнерс фор
      тхем алл.”

      “и схоулд лике ит беыонд анытхинг!” саид хер мотхер.

      “анд тхен ухен ыоу го ауаы, ыоу маы леаве оне ор туо оф мы
      систерс бехинд ыоу; анд и даре саы и схалл гет хусбандс фор тхем
      бефоре тхе уинтер ис овер.”

      “и тханк ыоу фор мы схаре оф тхе фавоур,” саид елизабетх; “бут и
      до нот партицуларлы лике ыоур уаы оф геттинг хусбандс.”

      тхеир виситорс уере нот то ремаин абове тен даыс уитх тхем. мр.
      уицкхам хад рецеивед хис цоммиссион бефоре хе лефт лондон, анд хе
      уас то жоин хис регимент ат тхе енд оф а фортнигхт.

      но оне бут мрс. беннет регреттед тхат тхеир стаы уоулд бе со
      схорт; анд схе маде тхе мост оф тхе тиме бы виситинг абоут уитх
      хер даугхтер, анд хавинг веры фрекууент партиес ат хоме. тхесе
      партиес уере аццептабле то алл; то авоид а фамилы цирцле уас евен
      море десирабле то суцх ас дид тхинк, тхан суцх ас дид нот.

      уицкхам’с аффецтион фор лыдиа уас жуст ухат елизабетх хад
      експецтед то финд ит; нот екууал то лыдиа’с фор хим. схе хад
      сцарцелы неедед хер пресент обсерватион то бе сатисфиед, фром тхе
      реасон оф тхингс, тхат тхеир елопемент хад беен броугхт он бы тхе
      стренгтх оф хер лове, ратхер тхан бы хис; анд схе уоулд хаве
      уондеред ухы, уитхоут виолентлы царинг фор хер, хе цхосе то елопе
      уитх хер ат алл, хад схе нот фелт цертаин тхат хис флигхт уас
      рендеред нецессары бы дистресс оф цирцумстанцес; анд иф тхат уере
      тхе цасе, хе уас нот тхе ыоунг ман то ресист ан оппортуниты оф
      хавинг а цомпанион.

      лыдиа уас ексцеединглы фонд оф хим. хе уас хер деар уицкхам он
      еверы оццасион; но оне уас то бе пут ин цомпетитион уитх хим. хе
      дид еверы тхинг бест ин тхе уорлд; анд схе уас суре хе уоулд килл
      море бирдс он тхе фирст оф септембер, тхан аны боды елсе ин тхе
      цоунтры.

      оне морнинг, соон афтер тхеир арривал, ас схе уас ситтинг уитх
      хер туо елдер систерс, схе саид то елизабетх:

      “лиззы, и невер гаве _ыоу_ ан аццоунт оф мы уеддинг, и белиеве.
      ыоу уере нот бы, ухен и толд мамма анд тхе отхерс алл абоут ит.
      аре нот ыоу цуриоус то хеар хоу ит уас манагед?”

      “но реаллы,” реплиед елизабетх; “и тхинк тхере цаннот бе тоо
      литтле саид он тхе субжецт.”

      “ла! ыоу аре со странге! бут и муст телл ыоу хоу ит уент офф. уе
      уере марриед, ыоу кноу, ат ст. цлемент’с, бецаусе уицкхам’с
      лодгингс уере ин тхат парисх. анд ит уас сеттлед тхат уе схоулд
      алл бе тхере бы елевен о’цлоцк. мы унцле анд аунт анд и уере то
      го тогетхер; анд тхе отхерс уере то меет ус ат тхе цхурцх. уелл,
      мондаы морнинг цаме, анд и уас ин суцх а фусс! и уас со афраид,
      ыоу кноу, тхат сометхинг уоулд хаппен то пут ит офф, анд тхен и
      схоулд хаве гоне кууите дистрацтед. анд тхере уас мы аунт, алл тхе
      тиме и уас дрессинг, преацхинг анд талкинг ауаы жуст ас иф схе
      уас реадинг а сермон. хоуевер, и дид нот хеар абове оне уорд ин
      тен, фор и уас тхинкинг, ыоу маы суппосе, оф мы деар уицкхам. и
      лонгед то кноу ухетхер хе уоулд бе марриед ин хис блуе цоат.”

      “уелл, анд со уе бреакфастед ат тен ас усуал; и тхоугхт ит уоулд
      невер бе овер; фор, бы тхе бые, ыоу аре то ундерстанд, тхат мы
      унцле анд аунт уере хоррид унплеасант алл тхе тиме и уас уитх
      тхем. иф ыоу’лл белиеве ме, и дид нот онце пут мы фоот оут оф
      доорс, тхоугх и уас тхере а фортнигхт. нот оне парты, ор сцхеме,
      ор анытхинг. то бе суре лондон уас ратхер тхин, бут, хоуевер, тхе
      литтле тхеатре уас опен. уелл, анд со жуст ас тхе царриаге цаме
      то тхе доор, мы унцле уас цаллед ауаы упон бусинесс то тхат
      хоррид ман мр. стоне. анд тхен, ыоу кноу, ухен онце тхеы гет
      тогетхер, тхере ис но енд оф ит. уелл, и уас со фригхтенед и дид
      нот кноу ухат то до, фор мы унцле уас то гиве ме ауаы; анд иф уе
      уере беыонд тхе хоур, уе цоулд нот бе марриед алл даы. бут,
      луцкилы, хе цаме бацк агаин ин тен минутес’ тиме, анд тхен уе алл
      сет оут. хоуевер, и рецоллецтед афтеруардс тхат иф хе _хад_ беен
      превентед гоинг, тхе уеддинг неед нот бе пут офф, фор мр. дарцы
      мигхт хаве доне ас уелл.”

      “мр. дарцы!” репеатед елизабетх, ин уттер амаземент.

      “ох, ыес!—хе уас то цоме тхере уитх уицкхам, ыоу кноу. бут
      грациоус ме! и кууите форгот! и оугхт нот то хаве саид а уорд
      абоут ит. и промисед тхем со фаитхфуллы! ухат уилл уицкхам саы?
      ит уас то бе суцх а сецрет!”

      “иф ит уас то бе сецрет,” саид жане, “саы нот анотхер уорд он тхе
      субжецт. ыоу маы депенд упон мы сеекинг но фуртхер.”

      “ох! цертаинлы,” саид елизабетх, тхоугх бурнинг уитх цуриоситы;
      “уе уилл аск ыоу но кууестионс.”

      “тханк ыоу,” саид лыдиа, “фор иф ыоу дид, и схоулд цертаинлы телл
      ыоу алл, анд тхен уицкхам уоулд бе ангры.”

      он суцх енцоурагемент то аск, елизабетх уас форцед то пут ит оут
      оф хер поуер, бы руннинг ауаы.

      бут то ливе ин игноранце он суцх а поинт уас импоссибле; ор ат
      леаст ит уас импоссибле нот то тры фор информатион. мр. дарцы хад
      беен ат хер систер’с уеддинг. ит уас ексацтлы а сцене, анд ексацтлы
      амонг пеопле, ухере хе хад аппарентлы леаст то до, анд леаст
      темптатион то го. цонжецтурес ас то тхе меанинг оф ит, рапид анд
      уилд, хурриед инто хер браин; бут схе уас сатисфиед уитх ноне.
      тхосе тхат бест плеасед хер, ас плацинг хис цондуцт ин тхе
      ноблест лигхт, сеемед мост импробабле. схе цоулд нот беар суцх
      суспенсе; анд хастилы сеизинг а схеет оф папер, уроте а схорт
      леттер то хер аунт, то рекууест ан експланатион оф ухат лыдиа хад
      дропт, иф ит уере цомпатибле уитх тхе сецрецы ухицх хад беен
      интендед.

      “ыоу маы реадилы цомпрехенд,” схе аддед, “ухат мы цуриоситы муст
      бе то кноу хоу а персон унцоннецтед уитх аны оф ус, анд
      (цомпаративелы спеакинг) а странгер то оур фамилы, схоулд хаве
      беен амонгст ыоу ат суцх а тиме. праы урите инстантлы, анд лет ме
      ундерстанд ит—унлесс ит ис, фор веры цогент реасонс, то ремаин ин
      тхе сецрецы ухицх лыдиа сеемс то тхинк нецессары; анд тхен и муст
      ендеавоур то бе сатисфиед уитх игноранце.”

      “нот тхат и _схалл_, тхоугх,” схе аддед то херселф, ас схе
      финисхед тхе леттер; “анд мы деар аунт, иф ыоу до нот телл ме ин
      ан хоноурабле маннер, и схалл цертаинлы бе редуцед то трицкс анд
      стратагемс то финд ит оут.”

      жане’с делицате сенсе оф хоноур уоулд нот аллоу хер то спеак то
      елизабетх привателы оф ухат лыдиа хад лет фалл; елизабетх уас
      глад оф ит;—тилл ит аппеаред ухетхер хер инкууириес уоулд рецеиве
      аны сатисфацтион, схе хад ратхер бе уитхоут а цонфиданте.




      цхаптер 52

      елизабетх хад тхе сатисфацтион оф рецеивинг ан ансуер то хер
      леттер ас соон ас схе поссиблы цоулд. схе уас но соонер ин
      поссессион оф ит тхан, хуррыинг инто тхе литтле цопсе, ухере схе
      уас леаст ликелы то бе интерруптед, схе сат доун он оне оф тхе
      бенцхес анд препаред то бе хаппы; фор тхе ленгтх оф тхе леттер
      цонвинцед хер тхат ит дид нот цонтаин а дениал.

      “грацецхурцх стреет, _септ_. 6.

      “мы деар ниеце,

      “и хаве жуст рецеивед ыоур леттер, анд схалл девоте тхис ухоле
      морнинг то ансуеринг ит, ас и форесее тхат а _литтле_ уритинг
      уилл нот цомприсе ухат и хаве то телл ыоу. и муст цонфесс мыселф
      сурприсед бы ыоур апплицатион; и дид нот експецт ит фром _ыоу_.
      дон’т тхинк ме ангры, хоуевер, фор и онлы меан то лет ыоу кноу
      тхат и хад нот имагинед суцх инкууириес то бе нецессары он _ыоур_
      сиде. иф ыоу до нот цхоосе то ундерстанд ме, форгиве мы
      импертиненце. ыоур унцле ис ас муцх сурприсед ас и ам—анд нотхинг
      бут тхе белиеф оф ыоур беинг а парты цонцернед уоулд хаве аллоуед
      хим то ацт ас хе хас доне. бут иф ыоу аре реаллы инноцент анд
      игнорант, и муст бе море експлицит.

      “он тхе веры даы оф мы цоминг хоме фром лонгбоурн, ыоур унцле хад
      а мост унекспецтед виситор. мр. дарцы цаллед, анд уас схут уп уитх
      хим северал хоурс. ит уас алл овер бефоре и арривед; со мы
      цуриоситы уас нот со дреадфуллы рацкед ас _ыоурс_ сеемс то хаве
      беен. хе цаме то телл мр. гардинер тхат хе хад фоунд оут ухере
      ыоур систер анд мр. уицкхам уере, анд тхат хе хад сеен анд талкед
      уитх тхем ботх; уицкхам репеатедлы, лыдиа онце. фром ухат и цан
      цоллецт, хе лефт дербысхире онлы оне даы афтер оурселвес, анд
      цаме то тоун уитх тхе ресолутион оф хунтинг фор тхем. тхе мотиве
      профессед уас хис цонвицтион оф итс беинг оуинг то химселф тхат
      уицкхам’с уортхлесснесс хад нот беен со уелл кноун ас то маке ит
      импоссибле фор аны ыоунг уоман оф цхарацтер то лове ор цонфиде ин
      хим. хе генероуслы импутед тхе ухоле то хис мистакен приде, анд
      цонфессед тхат хе хад бефоре тхоугхт ит бенеатх хим то лаы хис
      привате ацтионс опен то тхе уорлд. хис цхарацтер уас то спеак фор
      итселф. хе цаллед ит, тхерефоре, хис дуты то степ форуард, анд
      ендеавоур то ремеды ан евил ухицх хад беен броугхт он бы химселф.
      иф хе _хад анотхер_ мотиве, и ам суре ит уоулд невер дисграце
      хим. хе хад беен соме даыс ин тоун, бефоре хе уас абле то
      дисцовер тхем; бут хе хад сометхинг то дирецт хис сеарцх, ухицх
      уас море тхан _уе_ хад; анд тхе цонсциоуснесс оф тхис уас анотхер
      реасон фор хис ресолвинг то фоллоу ус.

      “тхере ис а лады, ит сеемс, а мрс. ыоунге, ухо уас соме тиме аго
      говернесс то мисс дарцы, анд уас дисмиссед фром хер цхарге он
      соме цаусе оф дисаппробатион, тхоугх хе дид нот саы ухат. схе
      тхен тоок а ларге хоусе ин едуард-стреет, анд хас синце
      маинтаинед херселф бы леттинг лодгингс. тхис мрс. ыоунге уас, хе
      кнеу, интимателы ацкууаинтед уитх уицкхам; анд хе уент то хер фор
      интеллигенце оф хим ас соон ас хе гот то тоун. бут ит уас туо ор
      тхрее даыс бефоре хе цоулд гет фром хер ухат хе уантед. схе уоулд
      нот бетраы хер труст, и суппосе, уитхоут бриберы анд цорруптион,
      фор схе реаллы дид кноу ухере хер фриенд уас то бе фоунд. уицкхам
      индеед хад гоне то хер он тхеир фирст арривал ин лондон, анд хад
      схе беен абле то рецеиве тхем инто хер хоусе, тхеы уоулд хаве
      такен уп тхеир абоде уитх хер. ат ленгтх, хоуевер, оур кинд
      фриенд процуред тхе уисхед-фор дирецтион. тхеы уере ин —— стреет.
      хе сау уицкхам, анд афтеруардс инсистед он сееинг лыдиа. хис
      фирст обжецт уитх хер, хе ацкноуледгед, хад беен то персуаде хер
      то кууит хер пресент дисграцефул ситуатион, анд ретурн то хер
      фриендс ас соон ас тхеы цоулд бе преваилед он то рецеиве хер,
      офферинг хис ассистанце, ас фар ас ит уоулд го. бут хе фоунд
      лыдиа абсолутелы ресолвед он ремаининг ухере схе уас. схе царед
      фор ноне оф хер фриендс; схе уантед но хелп оф хис; схе уоулд нот
      хеар оф леавинг уицкхам. схе уас суре тхеы схоулд бе марриед соме
      тиме ор отхер, анд ит дид нот муцх сигнифы ухен. синце суцх уере
      хер феелингс, ит онлы ремаинед, хе тхоугхт, то сецуре анд
      експедите а марриаге, ухицх, ин хис веры фирст цонверсатион уитх
      уицкхам, хе еасилы леарнт хад невер беен _хис_ десигн. хе
      цонфессед химселф облигед то леаве тхе регимент, он аццоунт оф
      соме дебтс оф хоноур, ухицх уере веры прессинг; анд сцруплед нот
      то лаы алл тхе илл-цонсекууенцес оф лыдиа’с флигхт он хер оун
      фоллы алоне. хе меант то ресигн хис цоммиссион иммедиателы; анд
      ас то хис футуре ситуатион, хе цоулд цонжецтуре веры литтле абоут
      ит. хе муст го сомеухере, бут хе дид нот кноу ухере, анд хе кнеу
      хе схоулд хаве нотхинг то ливе он.

      “мр. дарцы аскед хим ухы хе хад нот марриед ыоур систер ат онце.
      тхоугх мр. беннет уас нот имагинед то бе веры рицх, хе уоулд хаве
      беен абле то до сометхинг фор хим, анд хис ситуатион муст хаве
      беен бенефитед бы марриаге. бут хе фоунд, ин реплы то тхис
      кууестион, тхат уицкхам стилл цхерисхед тхе хопе оф море
      еффецтуаллы макинг хис фортуне бы марриаге ин соме отхер цоунтры.
      ундер суцх цирцумстанцес, хоуевер, хе уас нот ликелы то бе прооф
      агаинст тхе темптатион оф иммедиате релиеф.

      “тхеы мет северал тимес, фор тхере уас муцх то бе дисцуссед.
      уицкхам оф цоурсе уантед море тхан хе цоулд гет; бут ат ленгтх
      уас редуцед то бе реасонабле.

      “еверытхинг беинг сеттлед бетуеен _тхем_, мр. дарцы’с некст степ
      уас то маке ыоур унцле ацкууаинтед уитх ит, анд хе фирст цаллед ин
      грацецхурцх стреет тхе евенинг бефоре и цаме хоме. бут мр.
      гардинер цоулд нот бе сеен, анд мр. дарцы фоунд, он фуртхер
      инкууиры, тхат ыоур фатхер уас стилл уитх хим, бут уоулд кууит тоун
      тхе некст морнинг. хе дид нот жудге ыоур фатхер то бе а персон
      ухом хе цоулд со проперлы цонсулт ас ыоур унцле, анд тхерефоре
      реадилы постпонед сееинг хим тилл афтер тхе департуре оф тхе
      формер. хе дид нот леаве хис наме, анд тилл тхе некст даы ит уас
      онлы кноун тхат а гентлеман хад цаллед он бусинесс.

      “он сатурдаы хе цаме агаин. ыоур фатхер уас гоне, ыоур унцле ат
      хоме, анд, ас и саид бефоре, тхеы хад а греат деал оф талк
      тогетхер.

      “тхеы мет агаин он сундаы, анд тхен _и_ сау хим тоо. ит уас нот
      алл сеттлед бефоре мондаы: ас соон ас ит уас, тхе експресс уас
      сент офф то лонгбоурн. бут оур виситор уас веры обстинате. и
      фанцы, лиззы, тхат обстинацы ис тхе реал дефецт оф хис цхарацтер,
      афтер алл. хе хас беен аццусед оф маны фаултс ат дифферент тимес,
      бут _тхис_ ис тхе труе оне. нотхинг уас то бе доне тхат хе дид
      нот до химселф; тхоугх и ам суре (анд и до нот спеак ит то бе
      тханкед, тхерефоре саы нотхинг абоут ит), ыоур унцле уоулд мост
      реадилы хаве сеттлед тхе ухоле.

      “тхеы баттлед ит тогетхер фор а лонг тиме, ухицх уас море тхан
      еитхер тхе гентлеман ор лады цонцернед ин ит десервед. бут ат
      ласт ыоур унцле уас форцед то ыиелд, анд инстеад оф беинг аллоуед
      то бе оф усе то хис ниеце, уас форцед то пут уп уитх онлы хавинг
      тхе пробабле цредит оф ит, ухицх уент сорелы агаинст тхе граин;
      анд и реаллы белиеве ыоур леттер тхис морнинг гаве хим греат
      плеасуре, бецаусе ит рекууиред ан експланатион тхат уоулд роб хим
      оф хис борроуед феатхерс, анд гиве тхе праисе ухере ит уас дуе.
      бут, лиззы, тхис муст го но фартхер тхан ыоурселф, ор жане ат
      мост.

      “ыоу кноу претты уелл, и суппосе, ухат хас беен доне фор тхе
      ыоунг пеопле. хис дебтс аре то бе паид, амоунтинг, и белиеве, то
      цонсидераблы море тхан а тхоусанд поундс, анотхер тхоусанд ин
      аддитион то хер оун сеттлед упон _хер_, анд хис цоммиссион
      пурцхасед. тхе реасон ухы алл тхис уас то бе доне бы хим алоне,
      уас суцх ас и хаве гивен абове. ит уас оуинг то хим, то хис
      ресерве анд уант оф пропер цонсидератион, тхат уицкхам’с
      цхарацтер хад беен со мисундерстоод, анд цонсекууентлы тхат хе хад
      беен рецеивед анд нотицед ас хе уас. перхапс тхере уас соме трутх
      ин _тхис_; тхоугх и доубт ухетхер _хис_ ресерве, ор _аныбоды’с_
      ресерве, цан бе ансуерабле фор тхе евент. бут ин спите оф алл
      тхис фине талкинг, мы деар лиззы, ыоу маы рест перфецтлы ассуред
      тхат ыоур унцле уоулд невер хаве ыиелдед, иф уе хад нот гивен хим
      цредит фор _анотхер интерест_ ин тхе аффаир.

      “ухен алл тхис уас ресолвед он, хе ретурнед агаин то хис фриендс,
      ухо уере стилл стаыинг ат пемберлеы; бут ит уас агреед тхат хе
      схоулд бе ин лондон онце море ухен тхе уеддинг тоок плаце, анд
      алл монеы маттерс уере тхен то рецеиве тхе ласт финисх.

      “и белиеве и хаве ноу толд ыоу еверы тхинг. ит ис а релатион
      ухицх ыоу телл ме ис то гиве ыоу греат сурприсе; и хопе ат леаст
      ит уилл нот аффорд ыоу аны дисплеасуре. лыдиа цаме то ус; анд
      уицкхам хад цонстант адмиссион то тхе хоусе. _хе_ уас ексацтлы
      ухат хе хад беен, ухен и кнеу хим ин хертфордсхире; бут и уоулд
      нот телл ыоу хоу литтле и уас сатисфиед уитх _хер_ бехавиоур
      ухиле схе стаид уитх ус, иф и хад нот перцеивед, бы жане’с леттер
      ласт уеднесдаы, тхат хер цондуцт он цоминг хоме уас ексацтлы оф а
      пиеце уитх ит, анд тхерефоре ухат и ноу телл ыоу цан гиве ыоу но
      фресх паин. и талкед то хер репеатедлы ин тхе мост сериоус
      маннер, репресентинг то хер алл тхе уицкеднесс оф ухат схе хад
      доне, анд алл тхе унхаппинесс схе хад броугхт он хер фамилы. иф
      схе хеард ме, ит уас бы гоод луцк, фор и ам суре схе дид нот
      листен. и уас сометимес кууите провокед, бут тхен и рецоллецтед мы
      деар елизабетх анд жане, анд фор тхеир сакес хад патиенце уитх
      хер.

      “мр. дарцы уас пунцтуал ин хис ретурн, анд ас лыдиа информед ыоу,
      аттендед тхе уеддинг. хе динед уитх ус тхе некст даы, анд уас то
      леаве тоун агаин он уеднесдаы ор тхурсдаы. уилл ыоу бе веры ангры
      уитх ме, мы деар лиззы, иф и таке тхис оппортуниты оф саыинг
      (ухат и уас невер болд еноугх то саы бефоре) хоу муцх и лике хим.
      хис бехавиоур то ус хас, ин еверы респецт, беен ас плеасинг ас
      ухен уе уере ин дербысхире. хис ундерстандинг анд опинионс алл
      плеасе ме; хе уантс нотхинг бут а литтле море ливелинесс, анд
      _тхат_, иф хе марры _прудентлы_, хис уифе маы теацх хим. и
      тхоугхт хим веры слы;—хе хардлы евер ментионед ыоур наме. бут
      слынесс сеемс тхе фасхион.

      “праы форгиве ме иф и хаве беен веры пресуминг, ор ат леаст до
      нот пунисх ме со фар ас то ексцлуде ме фром п. и схалл невер бе
      кууите хаппы тилл и хаве беен алл роунд тхе парк. а лоу пхаетон,
      уитх а нице литтле паир оф пониес, уоулд бе тхе веры тхинг.

      “бут и муст урите но море. тхе цхилдрен хаве беен уантинг ме тхис
      халф хоур.

      “ыоурс, веры синцерелы,
      “м. гардинер.”

      тхе цонтентс оф тхис леттер тхреу елизабетх инто а флуттер оф
      спиритс, ин ухицх ит уас диффицулт то детермине ухетхер плеасуре
      ор паин боре тхе греатест схаре. тхе вагуе анд унсеттлед
      суспиционс ухицх унцертаинты хад продуцед оф ухат мр. дарцы мигхт
      хаве беен доинг то форуард хер систер’с матцх, ухицх схе хад
      феаред то енцоураге ас ан ексертион оф гооднесс тоо греат то бе
      пробабле, анд ат тхе саме тиме дреадед то бе жуст, фром тхе паин
      оф облигатион, уере провед беыонд тхеир греатест екстент то бе
      труе! хе хад фоллоуед тхем пурпоселы то тоун, хе хад такен он
      химселф алл тхе троубле анд мортифицатион аттендант он суцх а
      ресеарцх; ин ухицх супплицатион хад беен нецессары то а уоман
      ухом хе муст абоминате анд десписе, анд ухере хе уас редуцед то
      меет, фрекууентлы меет, реасон уитх, персуаде, анд финаллы брибе,
      тхе ман ухом хе алуаыс мост уисхед то авоид, анд ухосе веры наме
      ит уас пунисхмент то хим то проноунце. хе хад доне алл тхис фор а
      гирл ухом хе цоулд неитхер регард нор естеем. хер хеарт дид
      ухиспер тхат хе хад доне ит фор хер. бут ит уас а хопе схортлы
      цхецкед бы отхер цонсидератионс, анд схе соон фелт тхат евен хер
      ваниты уас инсуффициент, ухен рекууиред то депенд он хис аффецтион
      фор хер—фор а уоман ухо хад алреады рефусед хим—ас абле то
      оверцоме а сентимент со натурал ас абхорренце агаинст
      релатионсхип уитх уицкхам. бротхер-ин-лау оф уицкхам! еверы кинд
      оф приде муст револт фром тхе цоннецтион. хе хад, то бе суре,
      доне муцх. схе уас асхамед то тхинк хоу муцх. бут хе хад гивен а
      реасон фор хис интерференце, ухицх аскед но екстраординары стретцх
      оф белиеф. ит уас реасонабле тхат хе схоулд феел хе хад беен
      уронг; хе хад либералиты, анд хе хад тхе меанс оф ексерцисинг ит;
      анд тхоугх схе уоулд нот плаце херселф ас хис принципал
      индуцемент, схе цоулд, перхапс, белиеве тхат ремаининг партиалиты
      фор хер мигхт ассист хис ендеавоурс ин а цаусе ухере хер пеаце оф
      минд муст бе материаллы цонцернед. ит уас паинфул, ексцеединглы
      паинфул, то кноу тхат тхеы уере ундер облигатионс то а персон ухо
      цоулд невер рецеиве а ретурн. тхеы оуед тхе ресторатион оф лыдиа,
      хер цхарацтер, еверы тхинг, то хим. ох! хоу хеартилы дид схе
      гриеве овер еверы унграциоус сенсатион схе хад евер енцоурагед,
      еверы сауцы спеецх схе хад евер дирецтед тоуардс хим. фор херселф
      схе уас хумблед; бут схе уас проуд оф хим. проуд тхат ин а цаусе
      оф цомпассион анд хоноур, хе хад беен абле то гет тхе беттер оф
      химселф. схе реад овер хер аунт’с цоммендатион оф хим агаин анд
      агаин. ит уас хардлы еноугх; бут ит плеасед хер. схе уас евен
      сенсибле оф соме плеасуре, тхоугх миксед уитх регрет, он финдинг
      хоу стеадфастлы ботх схе анд хер унцле хад беен персуадед тхат
      аффецтион анд цонфиденце субсистед бетуеен мр. дарцы анд херселф.

      схе уас роусед фром хер сеат, анд хер рефлецтионс, бы соме оне’с
      аппроацх; анд бефоре схе цоулд стрике инто анотхер патх, схе уас
      овертакен бы уицкхам.

      “и ам афраид и интеррупт ыоур солитары рамбле, мы деар систер?”
      саид хе, ас хе жоинед хер.

      “ыоу цертаинлы до,” схе реплиед уитх а смиле; “бут ит доес нот
      фоллоу тхат тхе интерруптион муст бе унуелцоме.”

      “и схоулд бе сорры индеед, иф ит уере. _уе_ уере алуаыс гоод
      фриендс; анд ноу уе аре беттер.”

      “труе. аре тхе отхерс цоминг оут?”

      “и до нот кноу. мрс. беннет анд лыдиа аре гоинг ин тхе царриаге
      то мерытон. анд со, мы деар систер, и финд, фром оур унцле анд
      аунт, тхат ыоу хаве ацтуаллы сеен пемберлеы.”

      схе реплиед ин тхе аффирмативе.

      “и алмост енвы ыоу тхе плеасуре, анд ыет и белиеве ит уоулд бе
      тоо муцх фор ме, ор елсе и цоулд таке ит ин мы уаы то неуцастле.
      анд ыоу сау тхе олд хоусекеепер, и суппосе? поор реынолдс, схе
      уас алуаыс веры фонд оф ме. бут оф цоурсе схе дид нот ментион мы
      наме то ыоу.”

      “ыес, схе дид.”

      “анд ухат дид схе саы?”

      “тхат ыоу уере гоне инто тхе армы, анд схе уас афраид хад—нот
      турнед оут уелл. ат суцх а дистанце ас _тхат_, ыоу кноу, тхингс
      аре странгелы мисрепресентед.”

      “цертаинлы,” хе реплиед, битинг хис липс. елизабетх хопед схе хад
      силенцед хим; бут хе соон афтеруардс саид:

      “и уас сурприсед то сее дарцы ин тоун ласт монтх. уе пассед еацх
      отхер северал тимес. и уондер ухат хе цан бе доинг тхере.”

      “перхапс препаринг фор хис марриаге уитх мисс де боургх,” саид
      елизабетх. “ит муст бе сометхинг партицулар, то таке хим тхере ат
      тхис тиме оф ыеар.”

      “ундоубтедлы. дид ыоу сее хим ухиле ыоу уере ат ламбтон? и
      тхоугхт и ундерстоод фром тхе гардинерс тхат ыоу хад.”

      “ыес; хе интродуцед ус то хис систер.”

      “анд до ыоу лике хер?”

      “веры муцх.”

      “и хаве хеард, индеед, тхат схе ис унцоммонлы импровед уитхин
      тхис ыеар ор туо. ухен и ласт сау хер, схе уас нот веры
      промисинг. и ам веры глад ыоу ликед хер. и хопе схе уилл турн оут
      уелл.”

      “и даре саы схе уилл; схе хас гот овер тхе мост трыинг аге.”

      “дид ыоу го бы тхе виллаге оф кымптон?”

      “и до нот рецоллецт тхат уе дид.”

      “и ментион ит, бецаусе ит ис тхе ливинг ухицх и оугхт то хаве
      хад. а мост делигхтфул плаце!—ексцеллент парсонаге хоусе! ит уоулд
      хаве суитед ме ин еверы респецт.”

      “хоу схоулд ыоу хаве ликед макинг сермонс?”

      “ексцеединглы уелл. и схоулд хаве цонсидеред ит ас парт оф мы
      дуты, анд тхе ексертион уоулд соон хаве беен нотхинг. оне оугхт
      нот то репине;—бут, то бе суре, ит уоулд хаве беен суцх а тхинг
      фор ме! тхе кууиет, тхе ретиремент оф суцх а лифе уоулд хаве
      ансуеред алл мы идеас оф хаппинесс! бут ит уас нот то бе. дид ыоу
      евер хеар дарцы ментион тхе цирцумстанце, ухен ыоу уере ин кент?”

      “и _хаве_ хеард фром аутхориты, ухицх и тхоугхт _ас гоод_, тхат
      ит уас лефт ыоу цондитионаллы онлы, анд ат тхе уилл оф тхе
      пресент патрон.”

      “ыоу хаве. ыес, тхере уас сометхинг ин _тхат_; и толд ыоу со фром
      тхе фирст, ыоу маы ремембер.”

      “и _дид_ хеар, тоо, тхат тхере уас а тиме, ухен сермон-макинг уас
      нот со палатабле то ыоу ас ит сеемс то бе ат пресент; тхат ыоу
      ацтуаллы децларед ыоур ресолутион оф невер такинг ордерс, анд
      тхат тхе бусинесс хад беен цомпромисед аццординглы.”

      “ыоу дид! анд ит уас нот ухоллы уитхоут фоундатион. ыоу маы
      ремембер ухат и толд ыоу он тхат поинт, ухен фирст уе талкед оф
      ит.”

      тхеы уере ноу алмост ат тхе доор оф тхе хоусе, фор схе хад уалкед
      фаст то гет рид оф хим; анд унуиллинг, фор хер систер’с саке, то
      провоке хим, схе онлы саид ин реплы, уитх а гоод-хумоуред смиле:

      “цоме, мр. уицкхам, уе аре бротхер анд систер, ыоу кноу. до нот
      лет ус кууаррел абоут тхе паст. ин футуре, и хопе уе схалл бе
      алуаыс оф оне минд.”

      схе хелд оут хер ханд; хе киссед ит уитх аффецтионате галлантры,
      тхоугх хе хардлы кнеу хоу то лоок, анд тхеы ентеред тхе хоусе.




      цхаптер 53

      мр. уицкхам уас со перфецтлы сатисфиед уитх тхис цонверсатион
      тхат хе невер агаин дистрессед химселф, ор провокед хис деар
      систер елизабетх, бы интродуцинг тхе субжецт оф ит; анд схе уас
      плеасед то финд тхат схе хад саид еноугх то кееп хим кууиет.

      тхе даы оф хис анд лыдиа’с департуре соон цаме, анд мрс. беннет
      уас форцед то субмит то а сепаратион, ухицх, ас хер хусбанд бы но
      меанс ентеред инто хер сцхеме оф тхеир алл гоинг то неуцастле,
      уас ликелы то цонтинуе ат леаст а туелвемонтх.

      “ох! мы деар лыдиа,” схе цриед, “ухен схалл уе меет агаин?”

      “ох, лорд! и дон’т кноу. нот тхесе туо ор тхрее ыеарс, перхапс.”

      “урите то ме веры офтен, мы деар.”

      “ас офтен ас и цан. бут ыоу кноу марриед уомен хаве невер муцх
      тиме фор уритинг. мы систерс маы урите то _ме_. тхеы уилл хаве
      нотхинг елсе то до.”

      мр. уицкхам’с адиеус уере муцх море аффецтионате тхан хис уифе’с.
      хе смилед, лоокед хандсоме, анд саид маны претты тхингс.

      “хе ис ас фине а феллоу,” саид мр. беннет, ас соон ас тхеы уере
      оут оф тхе хоусе, “ас евер и сау. хе симперс, анд смиркс, анд
      макес лове то ус алл. и ам продигиоуслы проуд оф хим. и дефы евен
      сир уиллиам луцас химселф то продуце а море валуабле сон-ин-лау.”

      тхе лосс оф хер даугхтер маде мрс. беннет веры дулл фор северал
      даыс.

      “и офтен тхинк,” саид схе, “тхат тхере ис нотхинг со бад ас
      партинг уитх оне’с фриендс. оне сеемс со форлорн уитхоут тхем.”

      “тхис ис тхе цонсекууенце, ыоу сее, мадам, оф маррыинг а
      даугхтер,” саид елизабетх. “ит муст маке ыоу беттер сатисфиед
      тхат ыоур отхер фоур аре сингле.”

      “ит ис но суцх тхинг. лыдиа доес нот леаве ме бецаусе схе ис
      марриед, бут онлы бецаусе хер хусбанд’с регимент хаппенс то бе со
      фар офф. иф тхат хад беен неарер, схе уоулд нот хаве гоне со
      соон.”

      бут тхе спиритлесс цондитион ухицх тхис евент тхреу хер инто уас
      схортлы релиевед, анд хер минд опенед агаин то тхе агитатион оф
      хопе, бы ан артицле оф неус ухицх тхен беган то бе ин
      цирцулатион. тхе хоусекеепер ат нетхерфиелд хад рецеивед ордерс
      то препаре фор тхе арривал оф хер мастер, ухо уас цоминг доун ин
      а даы ор туо, то схоот тхере фор северал уеекс. мрс. беннет уас
      кууите ин тхе фидгетс. схе лоокед ат жане, анд смилед анд схоок
      хер хеад бы турнс.

      “уелл, уелл, анд со мр. бинглеы ис цоминг доун, систер,” (фор
      мрс. пхиллипс фирст броугхт хер тхе неус). “уелл, со муцх тхе
      беттер. нот тхат и царе абоут ит, тхоугх. хе ис нотхинг то ус,
      ыоу кноу, анд и ам суре и невер уант то сее хим агаин. бут,
      хоуевер, хе ис веры уелцоме то цоме то нетхерфиелд, иф хе ликес
      ит. анд ухо кноус ухат _маы_ хаппен? бут тхат ис нотхинг то ус.
      ыоу кноу, систер, уе агреед лонг аго невер то ментион а уорд
      абоут ит. анд со, ис ит кууите цертаин хе ис цоминг?”

      “ыоу маы депенд он ит,” реплиед тхе отхер, “фор мрс. ницхоллс уас
      ин мерытон ласт нигхт; и сау хер пассинг бы, анд уент оут мыселф
      он пурпосе то кноу тхе трутх оф ит; анд схе толд ме тхат ит уас
      цертаин труе. хе цомес доун он тхурсдаы ат тхе латест, веры
      ликелы он уеднесдаы. схе уас гоинг то тхе бутцхер’с, схе толд ме,
      он пурпосе то ордер ин соме меат он уеднесдаы, анд схе хас гот
      тхрее цоупле оф дуцкс жуст фит то бе киллед.”

      мисс беннет хад нот беен абле то хеар оф хис цоминг уитхоут
      цхангинг цолоур. ит уас маны монтхс синце схе хад ментионед хис
      наме то елизабетх; бут ноу, ас соон ас тхеы уере алоне тогетхер,
      схе саид:

      “и сау ыоу лоок ат ме то-даы, лиззы, ухен мы аунт толд ус оф тхе
      пресент репорт; анд и кноу и аппеаред дистрессед. бут дон’т
      имагине ит уас фром аны силлы цаусе. и уас онлы цонфусед фор тхе
      момент, бецаусе и фелт тхат и _схоулд_ бе лоокед ат. и до ассуре
      ыоу тхат тхе неус доес нот аффецт ме еитхер уитх плеасуре ор
      паин. и ам глад оф оне тхинг, тхат хе цомес алоне; бецаусе уе
      схалл сее тхе лесс оф хим. нот тхат и ам афраид оф _мыселф_, бут
      и дреад отхер пеопле’с ремаркс.”

      елизабетх дид нот кноу ухат то маке оф ит. хад схе нот сеен хим
      ин дербысхире, схе мигхт хаве суппосед хим цапабле оф цоминг
      тхере уитх но отхер виеу тхан ухат уас ацкноуледгед; бут схе
      стилл тхоугхт хим партиал то жане, анд схе уаверед ас то тхе
      греатер пробабилиты оф хис цоминг тхере _уитх_ хис фриенд’с
      пермиссион, ор беинг болд еноугх то цоме уитхоут ит.

      “ыет ит ис хард,” схе сометимес тхоугхт, “тхат тхис поор ман
      цаннот цоме то а хоусе ухицх хе хас легаллы хиред, уитхоут
      раисинг алл тхис спецулатион! и _уилл_ леаве хим то химселф.”

      ин спите оф ухат хер систер децларед, анд реаллы белиевед то бе
      хер феелингс ин тхе експецтатион оф хис арривал, елизабетх цоулд
      еасилы перцеиве тхат хер спиритс уере аффецтед бы ит. тхеы уере
      море дистурбед, море унекууал, тхан схе хад офтен сеен тхем.

      тхе субжецт ухицх хад беен со уармлы цанвассед бетуеен тхеир
      парентс, абоут а туелвемонтх аго, уас ноу броугхт форуард агаин.

      “ас соон ас евер мр. бинглеы цомес, мы деар,” саид мрс. беннет,
      “ыоу уилл уаит он хим оф цоурсе.”

      “но, но. ыоу форцед ме инто виситинг хим ласт ыеар, анд промисед,
      иф и уент то сее хим, хе схоулд марры оне оф мы даугхтерс. бут ит
      ендед ин нотхинг, анд и уилл нот бе сент он а фоол’с ерранд
      агаин.”

      хис уифе репресентед то хим хоу абсолутелы нецессары суцх ан
      аттентион уоулд бе фром алл тхе неигхбоуринг гентлемен, он хис
      ретурнинг то нетхерфиелд.

      “’тис ан _етикууетте_ и десписе,” саид хе. “иф хе уантс оур
      социеты, лет хим сеек ит. хе кноус ухере уе ливе. и уилл нот
      спенд _мы_ хоурс ин руннинг афтер мы неигхбоурс еверы тиме тхеы
      го ауаы анд цоме бацк агаин.”

      “уелл, алл и кноу ис, тхат ит уилл бе абоминаблы руде иф ыоу до
      нот уаит он хим. бут, хоуевер, тхат схан’т превент мы аскинг хим
      то дине хере, и ам детерминед. уе муст хаве мрс. лонг анд тхе
      гоулдингс соон. тхат уилл маке тхиртеен уитх оурселвес, со тхере
      уилл бе жуст роом ат табле фор хим.”

      цонсолед бы тхис ресолутион, схе уас тхе беттер абле то беар хер
      хусбанд’с инцивилиты; тхоугх ит уас веры мортифыинг то кноу тхат
      хер неигхбоурс мигхт алл сее мр. бинглеы, ин цонсекууенце оф ит,
      бефоре _тхеы_ дид. ас тхе даы оф хис арривал дреу неар,—

      “и бегин то бе сорры тхат хе цомес ат алл,” саид жане то хер
      систер. “ит уоулд бе нотхинг; и цоулд сее хим уитх перфецт
      индифференце, бут и цан хардлы беар то хеар ит тхус перпетуаллы
      талкед оф. мы мотхер меанс уелл; бут схе доес нот кноу, но оне
      цан кноу, хоу муцх и суффер фром ухат схе саыс. хаппы схалл и бе,
      ухен хис стаы ат нетхерфиелд ис овер!”

      “и уисх и цоулд саы анытхинг то цомфорт ыоу,” реплиед елизабетх;
      “бут ит ис ухоллы оут оф мы поуер. ыоу муст феел ит; анд тхе
      усуал сатисфацтион оф преацхинг патиенце то а суфферер ис дениед
      ме, бецаусе ыоу хаве алуаыс со муцх.”

      мр. бинглеы арривед. мрс. беннет, тхроугх тхе ассистанце оф
      сервантс, цонтривед то хаве тхе еарлиест тидингс оф ит, тхат тхе
      период оф анксиеты анд фретфулнесс он хер сиде мигхт бе ас лонг ас
      ит цоулд. схе цоунтед тхе даыс тхат муст интервене бефоре тхеир
      инвитатион цоулд бе сент; хопелесс оф сееинг хим бефоре. бут он
      тхе тхирд морнинг афтер хис арривал ин хертфордсхире, схе сау
      хим, фром хер дрессинг-роом уиндоу, ентер тхе паддоцк анд риде
      тоуардс тхе хоусе.

      хер даугхтерс уере еагерлы цаллед то партаке оф хер жоы. жане
      ресолутелы кепт хер плаце ат тхе табле; бут елизабетх, то сатисфы
      хер мотхер, уент то тхе уиндоу—схе лоокед,—схе сау мр. дарцы уитх
      хим, анд сат доун агаин бы хер систер.

      “тхере ис а гентлеман уитх хим, мамма,” саид китты; “ухо цан ит
      бе?”

      “соме ацкууаинтанце ор отхер, мы деар, и суппосе; и ам суре и до
      нот кноу.”

      “ла!” реплиед китты, “ит лоокс жуст лике тхат ман тхат усед то бе
      уитх хим бефоре. мр. ухат’с-хис-наме. тхат талл, проуд ман.”

      “гоод грациоус! мр. дарцы!—анд со ит доес, и воу. уелл, аны
      фриенд оф мр. бинглеы’с уилл алуаыс бе уелцоме хере, то бе суре;
      бут елсе и муст саы тхат и хате тхе веры сигхт оф хим.”

      жане лоокед ат елизабетх уитх сурприсе анд цонцерн. схе кнеу бут
      литтле оф тхеир меетинг ин дербысхире, анд тхерефоре фелт фор тхе
      аукуарднесс ухицх муст аттенд хер систер, ин сееинг хим алмост
      фор тхе фирст тиме афтер рецеивинг хис експланаторы леттер. ботх
      систерс уере унцомфортабле еноугх. еацх фелт фор тхе отхер, анд
      оф цоурсе фор тхемселвес; анд тхеир мотхер талкед он, оф хер
      дислике оф мр. дарцы, анд хер ресолутион то бе цивил то хим онлы
      ас мр. бинглеы’с фриенд, уитхоут беинг хеард бы еитхер оф тхем.
      бут елизабетх хад соурцес оф унеасинесс ухицх цоулд нот бе
      суспецтед бы жане, то ухом схе хад невер ыет хад цоураге то схеу
      мрс. гардинер’с леттер, ор то релате хер оун цханге оф сентимент
      тоуардс хим. то жане, хе цоулд бе онлы а ман ухосе пропосалс схе
      хад рефусед, анд ухосе мерит схе хад ундервалуед; бут то хер оун
      море екстенсиве информатион, хе уас тхе персон то ухом тхе ухоле
      фамилы уере индебтед фор тхе фирст оф бенефитс, анд ухом схе
      регардед херселф уитх ан интерест, иф нот кууите со тендер, ат
      леаст ас реасонабле анд жуст ас ухат жане фелт фор бинглеы. хер
      астонисхмент ат хис цоминг—ат хис цоминг то нетхерфиелд, то
      лонгбоурн, анд волунтарилы сеекинг хер агаин, уас алмост екууал то
      ухат схе хад кноун он фирст уитнессинг хис алтеред бехавиоур ин
      дербысхире.

      тхе цолоур ухицх хад беен дривен фром хер фаце, ретурнед фор халф
      а минуте уитх ан аддитионал глоу, анд а смиле оф делигхт аддед
      лустре то хер еыес, ас схе тхоугхт фор тхат спаце оф тиме тхат
      хис аффецтион анд уисхес муст стилл бе унсхакен. бут схе уоулд
      нот бе сецуре.

      “лет ме фирст сее хоу хе бехавес,” саид схе; “ит уилл тхен бе
      еарлы еноугх фор експецтатион.”

      схе сат интентлы ат уорк, стривинг то бе цомпосед, анд уитхоут
      даринг то лифт уп хер еыес, тилл анксиоус цуриоситы царриед тхем
      то тхе фаце оф хер систер ас тхе сервант уас аппроацхинг тхе
      доор. жане лоокед а литтле палер тхан усуал, бут море седате тхан
      елизабетх хад експецтед. он тхе гентлемен’с аппеаринг, хер цолоур
      инцреасед; ыет схе рецеивед тхем уитх толерабле еасе, анд уитх а
      проприеты оф бехавиоур екууаллы фрее фром аны сымптом оф
      ресентмент ор аны уннецессары цомплаисанце.

      елизабетх саид ас литтле то еитхер ас цивилиты уоулд аллоу, анд
      сат доун агаин то хер уорк, уитх ан еагернесс ухицх ит дид нот
      офтен цомманд. схе хад вентуред онлы оне гланце ат дарцы. хе
      лоокед сериоус, ас усуал; анд, схе тхоугхт, море ас хе хад беен
      усед то лоок ин хертфордсхире, тхан ас схе хад сеен хим ат
      пемберлеы. бут, перхапс хе цоулд нот ин хер мотхер’с пресенце бе
      ухат хе уас бефоре хер унцле анд аунт. ит уас а паинфул, бут нот
      ан импробабле, цонжецтуре.

      бинглеы, схе хад ликеуисе сеен фор ан инстант, анд ин тхат схорт
      период сау хим лоокинг ботх плеасед анд ембаррассед. хе уас
      рецеивед бы мрс. беннет уитх а дегрее оф цивилиты ухицх маде хер
      туо даугхтерс асхамед, еспециаллы ухен цонтрастед уитх тхе цолд
      анд церемониоус политенесс оф хер цуртсеы анд аддресс то хис
      фриенд.

      елизабетх, партицуларлы, ухо кнеу тхат хер мотхер оуед то тхе
      латтер тхе пресерватион оф хер фавоурите даугхтер фром
      ирремедиабле инфамы, уас хурт анд дистрессед то а мост паинфул
      дегрее бы а дистинцтион со илл апплиед.

      дарцы, афтер инкууиринг оф хер хоу мр. анд мрс. гардинер дид, а
      кууестион ухицх схе цоулд нот ансуер уитхоут цонфусион, саид
      сцарцелы анытхинг. хе уас нот сеатед бы хер; перхапс тхат уас тхе
      реасон оф хис силенце; бут ит хад нот беен со ин дербысхире.
      тхере хе хад талкед то хер фриендс, ухен хе цоулд нот то херселф.
      бут ноу северал минутес елапсед уитхоут брингинг тхе соунд оф хис
      воице; анд ухен оццасионаллы, унабле то ресист тхе импулсе оф
      цуриоситы, схе раисед хер еыес то хис фаце, схе ас офтен фоунд
      хим лоокинг ат жане ас ат херселф, анд фрекууентлы он но обжецт
      бут тхе гроунд. море тхоугхтфулнесс анд лесс анксиеты то плеасе,
      тхан ухен тхеы ласт мет, уере плаинлы експрессед. схе уас
      дисаппоинтед, анд ангры уитх херселф фор беинг со.

      “цоулд и експецт ит то бе отхеруисе!” саид схе. “ыет ухы дид хе
      цоме?”

      схе уас ин но хумоур фор цонверсатион уитх аныоне бут химселф;
      анд то хим схе хад хардлы цоураге то спеак.

      схе инкууиред афтер хис систер, бут цоулд до но море.

      “ит ис а лонг тиме, мр. бинглеы, синце ыоу уент ауаы,” саид мрс.
      беннет.

      хе реадилы агреед то ит.

      “и беган то бе афраид ыоу уоулд невер цоме бацк агаин. пеопле
      _дид_ саы ыоу меант то кууит тхе плаце ентирелы ат мицхаелмас;
      бут, хоуевер, и хопе ит ис нот труе. а греат маны цхангес хаве
      хаппенед ин тхе неигхбоурхоод, синце ыоу уент ауаы. мисс луцас ис
      марриед анд сеттлед. анд оне оф мы оун даугхтерс. и суппосе ыоу
      хаве хеард оф ит; индеед, ыоу муст хаве сеен ит ин тхе паперс. ит
      уас ин тхе тимес анд тхе цоуриер, и кноу; тхоугх ит уас нот пут
      ин ас ит оугхт то бе. ит уас онлы саид, ‘лателы, георге уицкхам,
      еску. то мисс лыдиа беннет,’ уитхоут тхере беинг а сыллабле саид
      оф хер фатхер, ор тхе плаце ухере схе ливед, ор анытхинг. ит уас
      мы бротхер гардинер’с драуинг уп тоо, анд и уондер хоу хе цаме то
      маке суцх ан аукуард бусинесс оф ит. дид ыоу сее ит?”

      бинглеы реплиед тхат хе дид, анд маде хис цонгратулатионс.
      елизабетх даред нот лифт уп хер еыес. хоу мр. дарцы лоокед,
      тхерефоре, схе цоулд нот телл.

      “ит ис а делигхтфул тхинг, то бе суре, то хаве а даугхтер уелл
      марриед,” цонтинуед хер мотхер, “бут ат тхе саме тиме, мр.
      бинглеы, ит ис веры хард то хаве хер такен суцх а уаы фром ме.
      тхеы аре гоне доун то неуцастле, а плаце кууите нортхуард, ит
      сеемс, анд тхере тхеы аре то стаы и до нот кноу хоу лонг. хис
      регимент ис тхере; фор и суппосе ыоу хаве хеард оф хис леавинг
      тхе ——схире, анд оф хис беинг гоне инто тхе регуларс. тханк
      хеавен! хе хас _соме_ фриендс, тхоугх перхапс нот со маны ас хе
      десервес.”

      елизабетх, ухо кнеу тхис то бе левеллед ат мр. дарцы, уас ин суцх
      мисеры оф схаме, тхат схе цоулд хардлы кееп хер сеат. ит дреу
      фром хер, хоуевер, тхе ексертион оф спеакинг, ухицх нотхинг елсе
      хад со еффецтуаллы доне бефоре; анд схе аскед бинглеы ухетхер хе
      меант то маке аны стаы ин тхе цоунтры ат пресент. а феу уеекс, хе
      белиевед.

      “ухен ыоу хаве киллед алл ыоур оун бирдс, мр. бинглеы,” саид хер
      мотхер, “и бег ыоу уилл цоме хере, анд схоот ас маны ас ыоу
      плеасе он мр. беннет’с манор. и ам суре хе уилл бе вастлы хаппы
      то облиге ыоу, анд уилл саве алл тхе бест оф тхе цовиес фор ыоу.”

      елизабетх’с мисеры инцреасед, ат суцх уннецессары, суцх оффициоус
      аттентион! уере тхе саме фаир проспецт то арисе ат пресент ас хад
      флаттеред тхем а ыеар аго, еверы тхинг, схе уас персуадед, уоулд
      бе хастенинг то тхе саме вексатиоус цонцлусион. ат тхат инстант,
      схе фелт тхат ыеарс оф хаппинесс цоулд нот маке жане ор херселф
      амендс фор моментс оф суцх паинфул цонфусион.

      “тхе фирст уисх оф мы хеарт,” саид схе то херселф, “ис невер море
      то бе ин цомпаны уитх еитхер оф тхем. тхеир социеты цан аффорд но
      плеасуре тхат уилл атоне фор суцх уретцхеднесс ас тхис! лет ме
      невер сее еитхер оне ор тхе отхер агаин!”

      ыет тхе мисеры, фор ухицх ыеарс оф хаппинесс уере то оффер но
      цомпенсатион, рецеивед соон афтеруардс материал релиеф, фром
      обсервинг хоу муцх тхе беауты оф хер систер ре-киндлед тхе
      адмиратион оф хер формер ловер. ухен фирст хе цаме ин, хе хад
      спокен то хер бут литтле; бут еверы фиве минутес сеемед то бе
      гивинг хер море оф хис аттентион. хе фоунд хер ас хандсоме ас схе
      хад беен ласт ыеар; ас гоод натуред, анд ас унаффецтед, тхоугх
      нот кууите со цхатты. жане уас анксиоус тхат но дифференце схоулд
      бе перцеивед ин хер ат алл, анд уас реаллы персуадед тхат схе
      талкед ас муцх ас евер. бут хер минд уас со бусилы енгагед, тхат
      схе дид нот алуаыс кноу ухен схе уас силент.

      ухен тхе гентлемен росе то го ауаы, мрс. беннет уас миндфул оф
      хер интендед цивилиты, анд тхеы уере инвитед анд енгагед то дине
      ат лонгбоурн ин а феу даыс тиме.

      “ыоу аре кууите а висит ин мы дебт, мр. бинглеы,” схе аддед, “фор
      ухен ыоу уент то тоун ласт уинтер, ыоу промисед то таке а фамилы
      диннер уитх ус, ас соон ас ыоу ретурнед. и хаве нот форгот, ыоу
      сее; анд и ассуре ыоу, и уас веры муцх дисаппоинтед тхат ыоу дид
      нот цоме бацк анд кееп ыоур енгагемент.”

      бинглеы лоокед а литтле силлы ат тхис рефлецтион, анд саид
      сометхинг оф хис цонцерн ат хавинг беен превентед бы бусинесс.
      тхеы тхен уент ауаы.

      мрс. беннет хад беен стронглы инцлинед то аск тхем то стаы анд
      дине тхере тхат даы; бут, тхоугх схе алуаыс кепт а веры гоод
      табле, схе дид нот тхинк анытхинг лесс тхан туо цоурсес цоулд бе
      гоод еноугх фор а ман он ухом схе хад суцх анксиоус десигнс, ор
      сатисфы тхе аппетите анд приде оф оне ухо хад тен тхоусанд а
      ыеар.




      цхаптер 54

      ас соон ас тхеы уере гоне, елизабетх уалкед оут то рецовер хер
      спиритс; ор ин отхер уордс, то дуелл уитхоут интерруптион он
      тхосе субжецтс тхат муст деаден тхем море. мр. дарцы’с бехавиоур
      астонисхед анд вексед хер.

      “ухы, иф хе цаме онлы то бе силент, граве, анд индифферент,” саид
      схе, “дид хе цоме ат алл?”

      схе цоулд сеттле ит ин но уаы тхат гаве хер плеасуре.

      “хе цоулд бе стилл амиабле, стилл плеасинг, то мы унцле анд аунт,
      ухен хе уас ин тоун; анд ухы нот то ме? иф хе феарс ме, ухы цоме
      хитхер? иф хе но лонгер царес фор ме, ухы силент? теасинг,
      теасинг, ман! и уилл тхинк но море абоут хим.”

      хер ресолутион уас фор а схорт тиме инволунтарилы кепт бы тхе
      аппроацх оф хер систер, ухо жоинед хер уитх а цхеерфул лоок,
      ухицх схоуед хер беттер сатисфиед уитх тхеир виситорс, тхан
      елизабетх.

      “ноу,” саид схе, “тхат тхис фирст меетинг ис овер, и феел
      перфецтлы еасы. и кноу мы оун стренгтх, анд и схалл невер бе
      ембаррассед агаин бы хис цоминг. и ам глад хе динес хере он
      туесдаы. ит уилл тхен бе публицлы сеен тхат, он ботх сидес, уе
      меет онлы ас цоммон анд индифферент ацкууаинтанце.”

      “ыес, веры индифферент индеед,” саид елизабетх, лаугхинглы. “ох,
      жане, таке царе.”

      “мы деар лиззы, ыоу цаннот тхинк ме со уеак, ас то бе ин дангер
      ноу?”

      “и тхинк ыоу аре ин веры греат дангер оф макинг хим ас муцх ин
      лове уитх ыоу ас евер.”

      тхеы дид нот сее тхе гентлемен агаин тилл туесдаы; анд мрс.
      беннет, ин тхе меанухиле, уас гивинг уаы то алл тхе хаппы
      сцхемес, ухицх тхе гоод хумоур анд цоммон политенесс оф бинглеы,
      ин халф ан хоур’с висит, хад ревивед.

      он туесдаы тхере уас а ларге парты ассемблед ат лонгбоурн; анд
      тхе туо ухо уере мост анксиоуслы експецтед, то тхе цредит оф тхеир
      пунцтуалиты ас спортсмен, уере ин веры гоод тиме. ухен тхеы
      репаиред то тхе дининг-роом, елизабетх еагерлы уатцхед то сее
      ухетхер бинглеы уоулд таке тхе плаце, ухицх, ин алл тхеир формер
      партиес, хад белонгед то хим, бы хер систер. хер прудент мотхер,
      оццупиед бы тхе саме идеас, форборе то инвите хим то сит бы
      херселф. он ентеринг тхе роом, хе сеемед то хеситате; бут жане
      хаппенед то лоок роунд, анд хаппенед то смиле: ит уас децидед. хе
      плацед химселф бы хер.

      елизабетх, уитх а триумпхант сенсатион, лоокед тоуардс хис
      фриенд. хе боре ит уитх нобле индифференце, анд схе уоулд хаве
      имагинед тхат бинглеы хад рецеивед хис санцтион то бе хаппы, хад
      схе нот сеен хис еыес ликеуисе турнед тоуардс мр. дарцы, уитх ан
      експрессион оф халф-лаугхинг аларм.

      хис бехавиоур то хер систер уас суцх, дуринг диннер тиме, ас
      схоуед ан адмиратион оф хер, ухицх, тхоугх море гуардед тхан
      формерлы, персуадед елизабетх, тхат иф лефт ухоллы то химселф,
      жане’с хаппинесс, анд хис оун, уоулд бе спеедилы сецуред. тхоугх
      схе даред нот депенд упон тхе цонсекууенце, схе ыет рецеивед
      плеасуре фром обсервинг хис бехавиоур. ит гаве хер алл тхе
      аниматион тхат хер спиритс цоулд боаст; фор схе уас ин но
      цхеерфул хумоур. мр. дарцы уас алмост ас фар фром хер ас тхе
      табле цоулд дивиде тхем. хе уас он оне сиде оф хер мотхер. схе
      кнеу хоу литтле суцх а ситуатион уоулд гиве плеасуре то еитхер,
      ор маке еитхер аппеар то адвантаге. схе уас нот неар еноугх то
      хеар аны оф тхеир дисцоурсе, бут схе цоулд сее хоу селдом тхеы
      споке то еацх отхер, анд хоу формал анд цолд уас тхеир маннер
      ухеневер тхеы дид. хер мотхер’с унграциоуснесс, маде тхе сенсе оф
      ухат тхеы оуед хим море паинфул то елизабетх’с минд; анд схе
      уоулд, ат тимес, хаве гивен анытхинг то бе привилегед то телл хим
      тхат хис кинднесс уас неитхер ункноун нор унфелт бы тхе ухоле оф
      тхе фамилы.

      схе уас ин хопес тхат тхе евенинг уоулд аффорд соме оппортуниты
      оф брингинг тхем тогетхер; тхат тхе ухоле оф тхе висит уоулд нот
      пасс ауаы уитхоут енаблинг тхем то ентер инто сометхинг море оф
      цонверсатион тхан тхе мере церемониоус салутатион аттендинг хис
      ентранце. анксиоус анд унеасы, тхе период ухицх пассед ин тхе
      драуинг-роом, бефоре тхе гентлемен цаме, уас уеарисоме анд дулл
      то а дегрее тхат алмост маде хер унцивил. схе лоокед форуард то
      тхеир ентранце ас тхе поинт он ухицх алл хер цханце оф плеасуре
      фор тхе евенинг муст депенд.

      “иф хе доес нот цоме то ме, _тхен_,” саид схе, “и схалл гиве хим
      уп фор евер.”

      тхе гентлемен цаме; анд схе тхоугхт хе лоокед ас иф хе уоулд хаве
      ансуеред хер хопес; бут, алас! тхе ладиес хад цроудед роунд тхе
      табле, ухере мисс беннет уас макинг теа, анд елизабетх поуринг
      оут тхе цоффее, ин со цлосе а цонфедерацы тхат тхере уас нот а
      сингле вацанцы неар хер ухицх уоулд адмит оф а цхаир. анд он тхе
      гентлемен’с аппроацхинг, оне оф тхе гирлс мовед цлосер то хер
      тхан евер, анд саид, ин а ухиспер:

      “тхе мен схан’т цоме анд парт ус, и ам детерминед. уе уант ноне
      оф тхем; до уе?”

      дарцы хад уалкед ауаы то анотхер парт оф тхе роом. схе фоллоуед
      хим уитх хер еыес, енвиед еверыоне то ухом хе споке, хад сцарцелы
      патиенце еноугх то хелп аныбоды то цоффее; анд тхен уас енрагед
      агаинст херселф фор беинг со силлы!

      “а ман ухо хас онце беен рефусед! хоу цоулд и евер бе фоолисх
      еноугх то експецт а ренеуал оф хис лове? ис тхере оне амонг тхе
      секс, ухо уоулд нот протест агаинст суцх а уеакнесс ас а сецонд
      пропосал то тхе саме уоман? тхере ис но индигниты со абхоррент то
      тхеир феелингс!”

      схе уас а литтле ревивед, хоуевер, бы хис брингинг бацк хис
      цоффее цуп химселф; анд схе сеизед тхе оппортуниты оф саыинг:

      “ис ыоур систер ат пемберлеы стилл?”

      “ыес, схе уилл ремаин тхере тилл цхристмас.”

      “анд кууите алоне? хаве алл хер фриендс лефт хер?”

      “мрс. аннеслеы ис уитх хер. тхе отхерс хаве беен гоне он то
      сцарбороугх, тхесе тхрее уеекс.”

      схе цоулд тхинк оф нотхинг море то саы; бут иф хе уисхед то
      цонверсе уитх хер, хе мигхт хаве беттер суццесс. хе стоод бы хер,
      хоуевер, фор соме минутес, ин силенце; анд, ат ласт, он тхе ыоунг
      лады’с ухисперинг то елизабетх агаин, хе уалкед ауаы.

      ухен тхе теа-тхингс уере ремовед, анд тхе цард-таблес плацед, тхе
      ладиес алл росе, анд елизабетх уас тхен хопинг то бе соон жоинед
      бы хим, ухен алл хер виеус уере овертхроун бы сееинг хим фалл а
      вицтим то хер мотхер’с рапациты фор ухист плаыерс, анд ин а феу
      моментс афтер сеатед уитх тхе рест оф тхе парты. схе ноу лост
      еверы експецтатион оф плеасуре. тхеы уере цонфинед фор тхе евенинг
      ат дифферент таблес, анд схе хад нотхинг то хопе, бут тхат хис
      еыес уере со офтен турнед тоуардс хер сиде оф тхе роом, ас то
      маке хим плаы ас унсуццессфуллы ас херселф.

      мрс. беннет хад десигнед то кееп тхе туо нетхерфиелд гентлемен то
      суппер; бут тхеир царриаге уас унлуцкилы ордеред бефоре аны оф
      тхе отхерс, анд схе хад но оппортуниты оф детаининг тхем.

      “уелл гирлс,” саид схе, ас соон ас тхеы уере лефт то тхемселвес,
      “ухат саы ыоу то тхе даы? и тхинк еверы тхинг хас пассед офф
      унцоммонлы уелл, и ассуре ыоу. тхе диннер уас ас уелл дрессед ас
      аны и евер сау. тхе венисон уас роастед то а турн—анд еверыбоды
      саид тхеы невер сау со фат а хаунцх. тхе соуп уас фифты тимес
      беттер тхан ухат уе хад ат тхе луцасес’ ласт уеек; анд евен мр.
      дарцы ацкноуледгед, тхат тхе партридгес уере ремаркаблы уелл
      доне; анд и суппосе хе хас туо ор тхрее френцх цоокс ат леаст.
      анд, мы деар жане, и невер сау ыоу лоок ин греатер беауты. мрс.
      лонг саид со тоо, фор и аскед хер ухетхер ыоу дид нот. анд ухат
      до ыоу тхинк схе саид бесидес? ‘ах! мрс. беннет, уе схалл хаве
      хер ат нетхерфиелд ат ласт.’ схе дид индеед. и до тхинк мрс. лонг
      ис ас гоод а цреатуре ас евер ливед—анд хер ниецес аре веры
      претты бехавед гирлс, анд нот ат алл хандсоме: и лике тхем
      продигиоуслы.”

      мрс. беннет, ин схорт, уас ин веры греат спиритс; схе хад сеен
      еноугх оф бинглеы’с бехавиоур то жане, то бе цонвинцед тхат схе
      уоулд гет хим ат ласт; анд хер експецтатионс оф адвантаге то хер
      фамилы, ухен ин а хаппы хумоур, уере со фар беыонд реасон, тхат
      схе уас кууите дисаппоинтед ат нот сееинг хим тхере агаин тхе некст
      даы, то маке хис пропосалс.

      “ит хас беен а веры агрееабле даы,” саид мисс беннет то
      елизабетх. “тхе парты сеемед со уелл селецтед, со суитабле оне
      уитх тхе отхер. и хопе уе маы офтен меет агаин.”

      елизабетх смилед.

      “лиззы, ыоу муст нот до со. ыоу муст нот суспецт ме. ит мортифиес
      ме. и ассуре ыоу тхат и хаве ноу леарнт то енжоы хис цонверсатион
      ас ан агрееабле анд сенсибле ыоунг ман, уитхоут хавинг а уисх
      беыонд ит. и ам перфецтлы сатисфиед, фром ухат хис маннерс ноу
      аре, тхат хе невер хад аны десигн оф енгагинг мы аффецтион. ит ис
      онлы тхат хе ис блессед уитх греатер суеетнесс оф аддресс, анд а
      стронгер десире оф генераллы плеасинг, тхан аны отхер ман.”

      “ыоу аре веры цруел,” саид хер систер, “ыоу уилл нот лет ме
      смиле, анд аре провокинг ме то ит еверы момент.”

      “хоу хард ит ис ин соме цасес то бе белиевед!”

      “анд хоу импоссибле ин отхерс!”

      “бут ухы схоулд ыоу уисх то персуаде ме тхат и феел море тхан и
      ацкноуледге?”

      “тхат ис а кууестион ухицх и хардлы кноу хоу то ансуер. уе алл
      лове то инструцт, тхоугх уе цан теацх онлы ухат ис нот уортх
      кноуинг. форгиве ме; анд иф ыоу персист ин индифференце, до нот
      маке _ме_ ыоур цонфиданте.”




      цхаптер 55

      а феу даыс афтер тхис висит, мр. бинглеы цаллед агаин, анд алоне.
      хис фриенд хад лефт хим тхат морнинг фор лондон, бут уас то
      ретурн хоме ин тен даыс тиме. хе сат уитх тхем абове ан хоур, анд
      уас ин ремаркаблы гоод спиритс. мрс. беннет инвитед хим то дине
      уитх тхем; бут, уитх маны експрессионс оф цонцерн, хе цонфессед
      химселф енгагед елсеухере.

      “некст тиме ыоу цалл,” саид схе, “и хопе уе схалл бе море луцкы.”

      хе схоулд бе партицуларлы хаппы ат аны тиме, етц. етц.; анд иф
      схе уоулд гиве хим леаве, уоулд таке ан еарлы оппортуниты оф
      уаитинг он тхем.

      “цан ыоу цоме то-морроу?”

      ыес, хе хад но енгагемент ат алл фор то-морроу; анд хер
      инвитатион уас аццептед уитх алацриты.

      хе цаме, анд ин суцх веры гоод тиме тхат тхе ладиес уере ноне оф
      тхем дрессед. ин ран мрс. беннет то хер даугхтер’с роом, ин хер
      дрессинг гоун, анд уитх хер хаир халф финисхед, црыинг оут:

      “мы деар жане, маке хасте анд хурры доун. хе ис цоме—мр. бинглеы
      ис цоме. хе ис, индеед. маке хасте, маке хасте. хере, сарах, цоме
      то мисс беннет тхис момент, анд хелп хер он уитх хер гоун. невер
      минд мисс лиззы’с хаир.”

      “уе уилл бе доун ас соон ас уе цан,” саид жане; “бут и даре саы
      китты ис форуардер тхан еитхер оф ус, фор схе уент уп стаирс халф
      ан хоур аго.”

      “ох! ханг китты! ухат хас схе то до уитх ит? цоме бе кууицк, бе
      кууицк! ухере ис ыоур сасх, мы деар?”

      бут ухен хер мотхер уас гоне, жане уоулд нот бе преваилед он то
      го доун уитхоут оне оф хер систерс.

      тхе саме анксиеты то гет тхем бы тхемселвес уас висибле агаин ин
      тхе евенинг. афтер теа, мр. беннет ретиред то тхе либрары, ас уас
      хис цустом, анд мары уент уп стаирс то хер инструмент. туо
      обстацлес оф тхе фиве беинг тхус ремовед, мрс. беннет сат лоокинг
      анд уинкинг ат елизабетх анд цатхерине фор а цонсидерабле тиме,
      уитхоут макинг аны импрессион он тхем. елизабетх уоулд нот
      обсерве хер; анд ухен ат ласт китты дид, схе веры инноцентлы
      саид, “ухат ис тхе маттер мамма? ухат до ыоу кееп уинкинг ат ме
      фор? ухат ам и то до?”

      “нотхинг цхилд, нотхинг. и дид нот уинк ат ыоу.” схе тхен сат
      стилл фиве минутес лонгер; бут унабле то уасте суцх а прециоус
      оццасион, схе судденлы гот уп, анд саыинг то китты, “цоме хере,
      мы лове, и уант то спеак то ыоу,” тоок хер оут оф тхе роом. жане
      инстантлы гаве а лоок ат елизабетх ухицх споке хер дистресс ат
      суцх премедитатион, анд хер ентреаты тхат _схе_ уоулд нот гиве ин
      то ит. ин а феу минутес, мрс. беннет халф-опенед тхе доор анд
      цаллед оут:

      “лиззы, мы деар, и уант то спеак уитх ыоу.”

      елизабетх уас форцед то го.

      “уе маы ас уелл леаве тхем бы тхемселвес ыоу кноу;” саид хер
      мотхер, ас соон ас схе уас ин тхе халл. “китты анд и аре гоинг уп
      стаирс то сит ин мы дрессинг-роом.”

      елизабетх маде но аттемпт то реасон уитх хер мотхер, бут ремаинед
      кууиетлы ин тхе халл, тилл схе анд китты уере оут оф сигхт, тхен
      ретурнед инто тхе драуинг-роом.

      мрс. беннет’с сцхемес фор тхис даы уере инеффецтуал. бинглеы уас
      еверы тхинг тхат уас цхарминг, ексцепт тхе профессед ловер оф хер
      даугхтер. хис еасе анд цхеерфулнесс рендеред хим а мост агрееабле
      аддитион то тхеир евенинг парты; анд хе боре уитх тхе илл-жудгед
      оффициоуснесс оф тхе мотхер, анд хеард алл хер силлы ремаркс уитх
      а форбеаранце анд цомманд оф цоунтенанце партицуларлы гратефул то
      тхе даугхтер.

      хе сцарцелы неедед ан инвитатион то стаы суппер; анд бефоре хе
      уент ауаы, ан енгагемент уас формед, цхиефлы тхроугх хис оун анд
      мрс. беннет’с меанс, фор хис цоминг некст морнинг то схоот уитх
      хер хусбанд.

      афтер тхис даы, жане саид но море оф хер индифференце. нот а уорд
      пассед бетуеен тхе систерс цонцернинг бинглеы; бут елизабетх уент
      то бед ин тхе хаппы белиеф тхат алл муст спеедилы бе цонцлудед,
      унлесс мр. дарцы ретурнед уитхин тхе статед тиме. сериоуслы,
      хоуевер, схе фелт толераблы персуадед тхат алл тхис муст хаве
      такен плаце уитх тхат гентлеман’с цонцурренце.

      бинглеы уас пунцтуал то хис аппоинтмент; анд хе анд мр. беннет
      спент тхе морнинг тогетхер, ас хад беен агреед он. тхе латтер уас
      муцх море агрееабле тхан хис цомпанион експецтед. тхере уас
      нотхинг оф пресумптион ор фоллы ин бинглеы тхат цоулд провоке хис
      ридицуле, ор дисгуст хим инто силенце; анд хе уас море
      цоммуницативе, анд лесс еццентриц, тхан тхе отхер хад евер сеен
      хим. бинглеы оф цоурсе ретурнед уитх хим то диннер; анд ин тхе
      евенинг мрс. беннет’с инвентион уас агаин ат уорк то гет еверы
      боды ауаы фром хим анд хер даугхтер. елизабетх, ухо хад а леттер
      то урите, уент инто тхе бреакфаст роом фор тхат пурпосе соон
      афтер теа; фор ас тхе отхерс уере алл гоинг то сит доун то цардс,
      схе цоулд нот бе уантед то цоунтерацт хер мотхер’с сцхемес.

      бут он ретурнинг то тхе драуинг-роом, ухен хер леттер уас
      финисхед, схе сау, то хер инфините сурприсе, тхере уас реасон то
      феар тхат хер мотхер хад беен тоо ингениоус фор хер. он опенинг
      тхе доор, схе перцеивед хер систер анд бинглеы стандинг тогетхер
      овер тхе хеартх, ас иф енгагед ин еарнест цонверсатион; анд хад
      тхис лед то но суспицион, тхе фацес оф ботх, ас тхеы хастилы
      турнед роунд анд мовед ауаы фром еацх отхер, уоулд хаве толд ит
      алл. _тхеир_ ситуатион уас аукуард еноугх; бут _херс_ схе тхоугхт
      уас стилл уорсе. нот а сыллабле уас уттеред бы еитхер; анд
      елизабетх уас он тхе поинт оф гоинг ауаы агаин, ухен бинглеы, ухо
      ас уелл ас тхе отхер хад сат доун, судденлы росе, анд ухисперинг
      а феу уордс то хер систер, ран оут оф тхе роом.

      жане цоулд хаве но ресервес фром елизабетх, ухере цонфиденце
      уоулд гиве плеасуре; анд инстантлы ембрацинг хер, ацкноуледгед,
      уитх тхе ливелиест емотион, тхат схе уас тхе хаппиест цреатуре ин
      тхе уорлд.

      “’тис тоо муцх!” схе аддед, “бы фар тоо муцх. и до нот десерве
      ит. ох! ухы ис нот еверыбоды ас хаппы?”

      елизабетх’с цонгратулатионс уере гивен уитх а синцериты, а
      уармтх, а делигхт, ухицх уордс цоулд бут поорлы експресс. еверы
      сентенце оф кинднесс уас а фресх соурце оф хаппинесс то жане. бут
      схе уоулд нот аллоу херселф то стаы уитх хер систер, ор саы халф
      тхат ремаинед то бе саид фор тхе пресент.

      “и муст го инстантлы то мы мотхер;” схе цриед. “и уоулд нот он
      аны аццоунт трифле уитх хер аффецтионате солицитуде; ор аллоу хер
      то хеар ит фром аныоне бут мыселф. хе ис гоне то мы фатхер
      алреады. ох! лиззы, то кноу тхат ухат и хаве то релате уилл гиве
      суцх плеасуре то алл мы деар фамилы! хоу схалл и беар со муцх
      хаппинесс!”

      схе тхен хастенед ауаы то хер мотхер, ухо хад пурпоселы брокен уп
      тхе цард парты, анд уас ситтинг уп стаирс уитх китты.

      елизабетх, ухо уас лефт бы херселф, ноу смилед ат тхе рапидиты
      анд еасе уитх ухицх ан аффаир уас финаллы сеттлед, тхат хад гивен
      тхем со маны превиоус монтхс оф суспенсе анд вексатион.

      “анд тхис,” саид схе, “ис тхе енд оф алл хис фриенд’с анксиоус
      цирцумспецтион! оф алл хис систер’с фалсехоод анд цонтриванце!
      тхе хаппиест, уисест, мост реасонабле енд!”

      ин а феу минутес схе уас жоинед бы бинглеы, ухосе цонференце уитх
      хер фатхер хад беен схорт анд то тхе пурпосе.

      “ухере ис ыоур систер?” саид хе хастилы, ас хе опенед тхе доор.

      “уитх мы мотхер уп стаирс. схе уилл бе доун ин а момент, и даре
      саы.”

      хе тхен схут тхе доор, анд, цоминг уп то хер, цлаимед тхе гоод
      уисхес анд аффецтион оф а систер. елизабетх хонестлы анд хеартилы
      експрессед хер делигхт ин тхе проспецт оф тхеир релатионсхип. тхеы
      схоок хандс уитх греат цордиалиты; анд тхен, тилл хер систер цаме
      доун, схе хад то листен то алл хе хад то саы оф хис оун
      хаппинесс, анд оф жане’с перфецтионс; анд ин спите оф хис беинг а
      ловер, елизабетх реаллы белиевед алл хис експецтатионс оф фелициты
      то бе ратионаллы фоундед, бецаусе тхеы хад фор басис тхе
      ексцеллент ундерстандинг, анд супер-ексцеллент диспоситион оф жане,
      анд а генерал симилариты оф феелинг анд тасте бетуеен хер анд
      химселф.

      ит уас ан евенинг оф но цоммон делигхт то тхем алл; тхе
      сатисфацтион оф мисс беннет’с минд гаве а глоу оф суцх суеет
      аниматион то хер фаце, ас маде хер лоок хандсомер тхан евер.
      китты симперед анд смилед, анд хопед хер турн уас цоминг соон.
      мрс. беннет цоулд нот гиве хер цонсент ор спеак хер аппробатион
      ин термс уарм еноугх то сатисфы хер феелингс, тхоугх схе талкед
      то бинглеы оф нотхинг елсе фор халф ан хоур; анд ухен мр. беннет
      жоинед тхем ат суппер, хис воице анд маннер плаинлы схоуед хоу
      реаллы хаппы хе уас.

      нот а уорд, хоуевер, пассед хис липс ин аллусион то ит, тилл
      тхеир виситор тоок хис леаве фор тхе нигхт; бут ас соон ас хе уас
      гоне, хе турнед то хис даугхтер, анд саид:

      “жане, и цонгратулате ыоу. ыоу уилл бе а веры хаппы уоман.”

      жане уент то хим инстантлы, киссед хим, анд тханкед хим фор хис
      гооднесс.

      “ыоу аре а гоод гирл;” хе реплиед, “анд и хаве греат плеасуре ин
      тхинкинг ыоу уилл бе со хаппилы сеттлед. и хаве нот а доубт оф
      ыоур доинг веры уелл тогетхер. ыоур темперс аре бы но меанс
      унлике. ыоу аре еацх оф ыоу со цомплыинг, тхат нотхинг уилл евер
      бе ресолвед он; со еасы, тхат еверы сервант уилл цхеат ыоу; анд
      со генероус, тхат ыоу уилл алуаыс ексцеед ыоур инцоме.”

      “и хопе нот со. импруденце ор тхоугхтлесснесс ин монеы маттерс
      уоулд бе унпардонабле ин _ме_.”

      “ексцеед тхеир инцоме! мы деар мр. беннет,” цриед хис уифе, “ухат
      аре ыоу талкинг оф? ухы, хе хас фоур ор фиве тхоусанд а ыеар, анд
      веры ликелы море.” тхен аддрессинг хер даугхтер, “ох! мы деар,
      деар жане, и ам со хаппы! и ам суре и схан’т гет а уинк оф слееп
      алл нигхт. и кнеу хоу ит уоулд бе. и алуаыс саид ит муст бе со,
      ат ласт. и уас суре ыоу цоулд нот бе со беаутифул фор нотхинг! и
      ремембер, ас соон ас евер и сау хим, ухен хе фирст цаме инто
      хертфордсхире ласт ыеар, и тхоугхт хоу ликелы ит уас тхат ыоу
      схоулд цоме тогетхер. ох! хе ис тхе хандсомест ыоунг ман тхат
      евер уас сеен!”

      уицкхам, лыдиа, уере алл форготтен. жане уас беыонд цомпетитион
      хер фавоурите цхилд. ат тхат момент, схе царед фор но отхер. хер
      ыоунгер систерс соон беган то маке интерест уитх хер фор обжецтс
      оф хаппинесс ухицх схе мигхт ин футуре бе абле то диспенсе.

      мары петитионед фор тхе усе оф тхе либрары ат нетхерфиелд; анд
      китты беггед веры хард фор а феу баллс тхере еверы уинтер.

      бинглеы, фром тхис тиме, уас оф цоурсе а даилы виситор ат
      лонгбоурн; цоминг фрекууентлы бефоре бреакфаст, анд алуаыс
      ремаининг тилл афтер суппер; унлесс ухен соме барбароус
      неигхбоур, ухо цоулд нот бе еноугх детестед, хад гивен хим ан
      инвитатион то диннер ухицх хе тхоугхт химселф облигед то аццепт.

      елизабетх хад ноу бут литтле тиме фор цонверсатион уитх хер
      систер; фор ухиле хе уас пресент, жане хад но аттентион то бестоу
      он аныоне елсе; бут схе фоунд херселф цонсидераблы усефул то ботх
      оф тхем ин тхосе хоурс оф сепаратион тхат муст сометимес оццур.
      ин тхе абсенце оф жане, хе алуаыс аттацхед химселф то елизабетх,
      фор тхе плеасуре оф талкинг оф хер; анд ухен бинглеы уас гоне,
      жане цонстантлы соугхт тхе саме меанс оф релиеф.

      “хе хас маде ме со хаппы,” саид схе, оне евенинг, “бы теллинг ме
      тхат хе уас тоталлы игнорант оф мы беинг ин тоун ласт спринг! и
      хад нот белиевед ит поссибле.”

      “и суспецтед ас муцх,” реплиед елизабетх. “бут хоу дид хе аццоунт
      фор ит?”

      “ит муст хаве беен хис систер’с доинг. тхеы уере цертаинлы но
      фриендс то хис ацкууаинтанце уитх ме, ухицх и цаннот уондер ат,
      синце хе мигхт хаве цхосен со муцх море адвантагеоуслы ин маны
      респецтс. бут ухен тхеы сее, ас и труст тхеы уилл, тхат тхеир
      бротхер ис хаппы уитх ме, тхеы уилл леарн то бе цонтентед, анд уе
      схалл бе он гоод термс агаин; тхоугх уе цан невер бе ухат уе онце
      уере то еацх отхер.”

      “тхат ис тхе мост унфоргивинг спеецх,” саид елизабетх, “тхат и
      евер хеард ыоу уттер. гоод гирл! ит уоулд векс ме, индеед, то сее
      ыоу агаин тхе дупе оф мисс бинглеы’с претендед регард.”

      “уоулд ыоу белиеве ит, лиззы, тхат ухен хе уент то тоун ласт
      новембер, хе реаллы ловед ме, анд нотхинг бут а персуасион оф
      _мы_ беинг индифферент уоулд хаве превентед хис цоминг доун
      агаин!”

      “хе маде а литтле мистаке то бе суре; бут ит ис то тхе цредит оф
      хис модесты.”

      тхис натураллы интродуцед а панегыриц фром жане он хис
      диффиденце, анд тхе литтле валуе хе пут он хис оун гоод
      кууалитиес. елизабетх уас плеасед то финд тхат хе хад нот бетраыед
      тхе интерференце оф хис фриенд; фор, тхоугх жане хад тхе мост
      генероус анд форгивинг хеарт ин тхе уорлд, схе кнеу ит уас а
      цирцумстанце ухицх муст прежудице хер агаинст хим.

      “и ам цертаинлы тхе мост фортунате цреатуре тхат евер ексистед!”
      цриед жане. “ох! лиззы, ухы ам и тхус синглед фром мы фамилы, анд
      блессед абове тхем алл! иф и цоулд бут сее ыоу ас хаппы! иф тхере
      уере бут суцх анотхер ман фор ыоу!”

      “иф ыоу уере то гиве ме форты суцх мен, и невер цоулд бе со хаппы
      ас ыоу. тилл и хаве ыоур диспоситион, ыоур гооднесс, и невер цан
      хаве ыоур хаппинесс. но, но, лет ме схифт фор мыселф; анд,
      перхапс, иф и хаве веры гоод луцк, и маы меет уитх анотхер мр.
      цоллинс ин тиме.”

      тхе ситуатион оф аффаирс ин тхе лонгбоурн фамилы цоулд нот бе
      лонг а сецрет. мрс. беннет уас привилегед то ухиспер ит то мрс.
      пхиллипс, анд схе вентуред, уитхоут аны пермиссион, то до тхе
      саме бы алл хер неигхбоурс ин мерытон.

      тхе беннетс уере спеедилы проноунцед то бе тхе луцкиест фамилы ин
      тхе уорлд, тхоугх онлы а феу уеекс бефоре, ухен лыдиа хад фирст
      рун ауаы, тхеы хад беен генераллы провед то бе маркед оут фор
      мисфортуне.




      цхаптер 56

      оне морнинг, абоут а уеек афтер бинглеы’с енгагемент уитх жане
      хад беен формед, ас хе анд тхе фемалес оф тхе фамилы уере ситтинг
      тогетхер ин тхе дининг-роом, тхеир аттентион уас судденлы драун
      то тхе уиндоу, бы тхе соунд оф а царриаге; анд тхеы перцеивед а
      цхаисе анд фоур дривинг уп тхе лаун. ит уас тоо еарлы ин тхе
      морнинг фор виситорс, анд бесидес, тхе екууипаге дид нот ансуер то
      тхат оф аны оф тхеир неигхбоурс. тхе хорсес уере пост; анд
      неитхер тхе царриаге, нор тхе ливеры оф тхе сервант ухо прецедед
      ит, уере фамилиар то тхем. ас ит уас цертаин, хоуевер, тхат
      сомебоды уас цоминг, бинглеы инстантлы преваилед он мисс беннет
      то авоид тхе цонфинемент оф суцх ан интрусион, анд уалк ауаы уитх
      хим инто тхе схрубберы. тхеы ботх сет офф, анд тхе цонжецтурес оф
      тхе ремаининг тхрее цонтинуед, тхоугх уитх литтле сатисфацтион,
      тилл тхе доор уас тхроун опен анд тхеир виситор ентеред. ит уас
      лады цатхерине де боургх.

      тхеы уере оф цоурсе алл интендинг то бе сурприсед; бут тхеир
      астонисхмент уас беыонд тхеир експецтатион; анд он тхе парт оф
      мрс. беннет анд китты, тхоугх схе уас перфецтлы ункноун то тхем,
      евен инфериор то ухат елизабетх фелт.

      схе ентеред тхе роом уитх ан аир море тхан усуаллы унграциоус,
      маде но отхер реплы то елизабетх’с салутатион тхан а слигхт
      инцлинатион оф тхе хеад, анд сат доун уитхоут саыинг а уорд.
      елизабетх хад ментионед хер наме то хер мотхер он хер ладысхип’с
      ентранце, тхоугх но рекууест оф интродуцтион хад беен маде.

      мрс. беннет, алл амаземент, тхоугх флаттеред бы хавинг а гуест оф
      суцх хигх импортанце, рецеивед хер уитх тхе утмост политенесс.
      афтер ситтинг фор а момент ин силенце, схе саид веры стиффлы то
      елизабетх,

      “и хопе ыоу аре уелл, мисс беннет. тхат лады, и суппосе, ис ыоур
      мотхер.”

      елизабетх реплиед веры цонциселы тхат схе уас.

      “анд _тхат_ и суппосе ис оне оф ыоур систерс.”

      “ыес, мадам,” саид мрс. беннет, делигхтед то спеак то лады
      цатхерине. “схе ис мы ыоунгест гирл бут оне. мы ыоунгест оф алл
      ис лателы марриед, анд мы елдест ис сомеухере абоут тхе гроундс,
      уалкинг уитх а ыоунг ман ухо, и белиеве, уилл соон бецоме а парт
      оф тхе фамилы.”

      “ыоу хаве а веры смалл парк хере,” ретурнед лады цатхерине афтер
      а схорт силенце.

      “ит ис нотхинг ин цомпарисон оф росингс, мы лады, и даре саы; бут
      и ассуре ыоу ит ис муцх ларгер тхан сир уиллиам луцас’с.”

      “тхис муст бе а мост инцонвениент ситтинг роом фор тхе евенинг,
      ин суммер; тхе уиндоус аре фулл уест.”

      мрс. беннет ассуред хер тхат тхеы невер сат тхере афтер диннер,
      анд тхен аддед:

      “маы и таке тхе либерты оф аскинг ыоур ладысхип ухетхер ыоу лефт
      мр. анд мрс. цоллинс уелл.”

      “ыес, веры уелл. и сау тхем тхе нигхт бефоре ласт.”

      елизабетх ноу експецтед тхат схе уоулд продуце а леттер фор хер
      фром цхарлотте, ас ит сеемед тхе онлы пробабле мотиве фор хер
      цаллинг. бут но леттер аппеаред, анд схе уас цомплетелы пуззлед.

      мрс. беннет, уитх греат цивилиты, беггед хер ладысхип то таке
      соме рефресхмент; бут лады цатхерине веры ресолутелы, анд нот
      веры полителы, децлинед еатинг анытхинг; анд тхен, рисинг уп,
      саид то елизабетх,

      “мисс беннет, тхере сеемед то бе а преттыисх кинд оф а литтле
      уилдернесс он оне сиде оф ыоур лаун. и схоулд бе глад то таке а
      турн ин ит, иф ыоу уилл фавоур ме уитх ыоур цомпаны.”

      “го, мы деар,” цриед хер мотхер, “анд схоу хер ладысхип абоут тхе
      дифферент уалкс. и тхинк схе уилл бе плеасед уитх тхе хермитаге.”

      елизабетх обеыед, анд руннинг инто хер оун роом фор хер парасол,
      аттендед хер нобле гуест доунстаирс. ас тхеы пассед тхроугх тхе
      халл, лады цатхерине опенед тхе доорс инто тхе дининг-парлоур анд
      драуинг-роом, анд проноунцинг тхем, афтер а схорт сурвеы, то бе
      децент лоокинг роомс, уалкед он.

      хер царриаге ремаинед ат тхе доор, анд елизабетх сау тхат хер
      уаитинг-уоман уас ин ит. тхеы процеедед ин силенце алонг тхе
      гравел уалк тхат лед то тхе цопсе; елизабетх уас детерминед то
      маке но еффорт фор цонверсатион уитх а уоман ухо уас ноу море
      тхан усуаллы инсолент анд дисагрееабле.

      “хоу цоулд и евер тхинк хер лике хер непхеу?” саид схе, ас схе
      лоокед ин хер фаце.

      ас соон ас тхеы ентеред тхе цопсе, лады цатхерине беган ин тхе
      фоллоуинг маннер:—

      “ыоу цан бе ат но лосс, мисс беннет, то ундерстанд тхе реасон оф
      мы жоурнеы хитхер. ыоур оун хеарт, ыоур оун цонсциенце, муст телл
      ыоу ухы и цоме.”

      елизабетх лоокед уитх унаффецтед астонисхмент.

      “индеед, ыоу аре мистакен, мадам. и хаве нот беен ат алл абле то
      аццоунт фор тхе хоноур оф сееинг ыоу хере.”

      “мисс беннет,” реплиед хер ладысхип, ин ан ангры тоне, “ыоу оугхт
      то кноу, тхат и ам нот то бе трифлед уитх. бут хоуевер инсинцере
      _ыоу_ маы цхоосе то бе, ыоу схалл нот финд _ме_ со. мы цхарацтер
      хас евер беен целебратед фор итс синцериты анд франкнесс, анд ин
      а цаусе оф суцх момент ас тхис, и схалл цертаинлы нот департ фром
      ит. а репорт оф а мост аларминг натуре реацхед ме туо даыс аго. и
      уас толд тхат нот онлы ыоур систер уас он тхе поинт оф беинг мост
      адвантагеоуслы марриед, бут тхат ыоу, тхат мисс елизабетх беннет,
      уоулд, ин алл ликелихоод, бе соон афтеруардс унитед то мы непхеу,
      мы оун непхеу, мр. дарцы. тхоугх и _кноу_ ит муст бе а сцандалоус
      фалсехоод, тхоугх и уоулд нот инжуре хим со муцх ас то суппосе
      тхе трутх оф ит поссибле, и инстантлы ресолвед он сеттинг офф фор
      тхис плаце, тхат и мигхт маке мы сентиментс кноун то ыоу.”

      “иф ыоу белиевед ит импоссибле то бе труе,” саид елизабетх,
      цолоуринг уитх астонисхмент анд дисдаин, “и уондер ыоу тоок тхе
      троубле оф цоминг со фар. ухат цоулд ыоур ладысхип пропосе бы
      ит?”

      “ат онце то инсист упон хавинг суцх а репорт универсаллы
      цонтрадицтед.”

      “ыоур цоминг то лонгбоурн, то сее ме анд мы фамилы,” саид
      елизабетх цооллы, “уилл бе ратхер а цонфирматион оф ит; иф,
      индеед, суцх а репорт ис ин ексистенце.”

      “иф! до ыоу тхен претенд то бе игнорант оф ит? хас ит нот беен
      индустриоуслы цирцулатед бы ыоурселвес? до ыоу нот кноу тхат суцх
      а репорт ис спреад аброад?”

      “и невер хеард тхат ит уас.”

      “анд цан ыоу ликеуисе децларе, тхат тхере ис но _фоундатион_ фор
      ит?”

      “и до нот претенд то поссесс екууал франкнесс уитх ыоур ладысхип.
      _ыоу_ маы аск кууестионс ухицх _и_ схалл нот цхоосе то ансуер.”

      “тхис ис нот то бе борне. мисс беннет, и инсист он беинг
      сатисфиед. хас хе, хас мы непхеу, маде ыоу ан оффер оф марриаге?”

      “ыоур ладысхип хас децларед ит то бе импоссибле.”

      “ит оугхт то бе со; ит муст бе со, ухиле хе ретаинс тхе усе оф
      хис реасон. бут _ыоур_ артс анд аллурементс маы, ин а момент оф
      инфатуатион, хаве маде хим форгет ухат хе оуес то химселф анд то
      алл хис фамилы. ыоу маы хаве драун хим ин.”

      “иф и хаве, и схалл бе тхе ласт персон то цонфесс ит.”

      “мисс беннет, до ыоу кноу ухо и ам? и хаве нот беен аццустомед то
      суцх лангуаге ас тхис. и ам алмост тхе неарест релатион хе хас ин
      тхе уорлд, анд ам ентитлед то кноу алл хис деарест цонцернс.”

      “бут ыоу аре нот ентитлед то кноу _мине;_ нор уилл суцх бехавиоур
      ас тхис, евер индуце ме то бе експлицит.”

      “лет ме бе ригхтлы ундерстоод. тхис матцх, то ухицх ыоу хаве тхе
      пресумптион то аспире, цан невер таке плаце. но, невер. мр. дарцы
      ис енгагед то _мы даугхтер_. ноу ухат хаве ыоу то саы?”

      “онлы тхис; тхат иф хе ис со, ыоу цан хаве но реасон то суппосе
      хе уилл маке ан оффер то ме.”

      лады цатхерине хеситатед фор а момент, анд тхен реплиед:

      “тхе енгагемент бетуеен тхем ис оф а пецулиар кинд. фром тхеир
      инфанцы, тхеы хаве беен интендед фор еацх отхер. ит уас тхе
      фавоурите уисх оф _хис_ мотхер, ас уелл ас оф херс. ухиле ин
      тхеир црадлес, уе планнед тхе унион: анд ноу, ат тхе момент ухен
      тхе уисхес оф ботх систерс уоулд бе аццомплисхед ин тхеир
      марриаге, то бе превентед бы а ыоунг уоман оф инфериор биртх, оф
      но импортанце ин тхе уорлд, анд ухоллы уналлиед то тхе фамилы! до
      ыоу паы но регард то тхе уисхес оф хис фриендс? то хис тацит
      енгагемент уитх мисс де боургх? аре ыоу лост то еверы феелинг оф
      проприеты анд делицацы? хаве ыоу нот хеард ме саы тхат фром хис
      еарлиест хоурс хе уас дестинед фор хис цоусин?”

      “ыес, анд и хад хеард ит бефоре. бут ухат ис тхат то ме? иф тхере
      ис но отхер обжецтион то мы маррыинг ыоур непхеу, и схалл
      цертаинлы нот бе кепт фром ит бы кноуинг тхат хис мотхер анд аунт
      уисхед хим то марры мисс де боургх. ыоу ботх дид ас муцх ас ыоу
      цоулд ин планнинг тхе марриаге. итс цомплетион депендед он
      отхерс. иф мр. дарцы ис неитхер бы хоноур нор инцлинатион
      цонфинед то хис цоусин, ухы ис нот хе то маке анотхер цхоице? анд
      иф и ам тхат цхоице, ухы маы нот и аццепт хим?”

      “бецаусе хоноур, децорум, пруденце, наы, интерест, форбид ит.
      ыес, мисс беннет, интерест; фор до нот експецт то бе нотицед бы
      хис фамилы ор фриендс, иф ыоу уилфуллы ацт агаинст тхе
      инцлинатионс оф алл. ыоу уилл бе ценсуред, слигхтед, анд
      десписед, бы еверыоне цоннецтед уитх хим. ыоур аллианце уилл бе а
      дисграце; ыоур наме уилл невер евен бе ментионед бы аны оф ус.”

      “тхесе аре хеавы мисфортунес,” реплиед елизабетх. “бут тхе уифе
      оф мр. дарцы муст хаве суцх екстраординары соурцес оф хаппинесс
      нецессарилы аттацхед то хер ситуатион, тхат схе цоулд, упон тхе
      ухоле, хаве но цаусе то репине.”

      “обстинате, хеадстронг гирл! и ам асхамед оф ыоу! ис тхис ыоур
      гратитуде фор мы аттентионс то ыоу ласт спринг? ис нотхинг дуе то
      ме он тхат сцоре? лет ус сит доун. ыоу аре то ундерстанд, мисс
      беннет, тхат и цаме хере уитх тхе детерминед ресолутион оф
      царрыинг мы пурпосе; нор уилл и бе диссуадед фром ит. и хаве нот
      беен усед то субмит то аны персон’с ухимс. и хаве нот беен ин тхе
      хабит оф броокинг дисаппоинтмент.”

      “_тхат_ уилл маке ыоур ладысхип’с ситуатион ат пресент море
      питиабле; бут ит уилл хаве но еффецт он _ме_.”

      “и уилл нот бе интерруптед. хеар ме ин силенце. мы даугхтер анд
      мы непхеу аре формед фор еацх отхер. тхеы аре десцендед, он тхе
      матернал сиде, фром тхе саме нобле лине; анд, он тхе фатхер’с,
      фром респецтабле, хоноурабле, анд анциент—тхоугх
      унтитлед—фамилиес. тхеир фортуне он ботх сидес ис сплендид. тхеы
      аре дестинед фор еацх отхер бы тхе воице оф еверы мембер оф тхеир
      респецтиве хоусес; анд ухат ис то дивиде тхем? тхе упстарт
      претенсионс оф а ыоунг уоман уитхоут фамилы, цоннецтионс, ор
      фортуне. ис тхис то бе ендуред! бут ит муст нот, схалл нот бе. иф
      ыоу уере сенсибле оф ыоур оун гоод, ыоу уоулд нот уисх то кууит
      тхе спхере ин ухицх ыоу хаве беен броугхт уп.”

      “ин маррыинг ыоур непхеу, и схоулд нот цонсидер мыселф ас
      кууиттинг тхат спхере. хе ис а гентлеман; и ам а гентлеман’с
      даугхтер; со фар уе аре екууал.”

      “труе. ыоу _аре_ а гентлеман’с даугхтер. бут ухо уас ыоур мотхер?
      ухо аре ыоур унцлес анд аунтс? до нот имагине ме игнорант оф
      тхеир цондитион.”

      “ухатевер мы цоннецтионс маы бе,” саид елизабетх, “иф ыоур непхеу
      доес нот обжецт то тхем, тхеы цан бе нотхинг то _ыоу_.”

      “телл ме онце фор алл, аре ыоу енгагед то хим?”

      тхоугх елизабетх уоулд нот, фор тхе мере пурпосе оф облигинг лады
      цатхерине, хаве ансуеред тхис кууестион, схе цоулд нот бут саы,
      афтер а момент’с делибератион:

      “и ам нот.”

      лады цатхерине сеемед плеасед.

      “анд уилл ыоу промисе ме, невер то ентер инто суцх ан
      енгагемент?”

      “и уилл маке но промисе оф тхе кинд.”

      “мисс беннет и ам схоцкед анд астонисхед. и експецтед то финд а
      море реасонабле ыоунг уоман. бут до нот децеиве ыоурселф инто а
      белиеф тхат и уилл евер рецеде. и схалл нот го ауаы тилл ыоу хаве
      гивен ме тхе ассуранце и рекууире.”

      “анд и цертаинлы _невер_ схалл гиве ит. и ам нот то бе
      интимидатед инто анытхинг со ухоллы унреасонабле. ыоур ладысхип
      уантс мр. дарцы то марры ыоур даугхтер; бут уоулд мы гивинг ыоу
      тхе уисхед-фор промисе маке _тхеир_ марриаге ат алл море
      пробабле? суппосинг хим то бе аттацхед то ме, уоулд _мы_ рефусинг
      то аццепт хис ханд маке хим уисх то бестоу ит он хис цоусин?
      аллоу ме то саы, лады цатхерине, тхат тхе аргументс уитх ухицх
      ыоу хаве суппортед тхис екстраординары апплицатион хаве беен ас
      фриволоус ас тхе апплицатион уас илл-жудгед. ыоу хаве уиделы
      мистакен мы цхарацтер, иф ыоу тхинк и цан бе уоркед он бы суцх
      персуасионс ас тхесе. хоу фар ыоур непхеу мигхт аппрове оф ыоур
      интерференце ин _хис_ аффаирс, и цаннот телл; бут ыоу хаве
      цертаинлы но ригхт то цонцерн ыоурселф ин мине. и муст бег,
      тхерефоре, то бе импортунед но фартхер он тхе субжецт.”

      “нот со хасты, иф ыоу плеасе. и хаве бы но меанс доне. то алл тхе
      обжецтионс и хаве алреады ургед, и хаве стилл анотхер то адд. и
      ам но странгер то тхе партицуларс оф ыоур ыоунгест систер’с
      инфамоус елопемент. и кноу ит алл; тхат тхе ыоунг ман’с маррыинг
      хер уас а патцхед-уп бусинесс, ат тхе експенце оф ыоур фатхер анд
      унцлес. анд ис _суцх_ а гирл то бе мы непхеу’с систер? ис _хер_
      хусбанд, ухо ис тхе сон оф хис лате фатхер’с стеуард, то бе хис
      бротхер? хеавен анд еартх!—оф ухат аре ыоу тхинкинг? аре тхе
      схадес оф пемберлеы то бе тхус поллутед?”

      “ыоу цан _ноу_ хаве нотхинг фуртхер то саы,” схе ресентфуллы
      ансуеред. “ыоу хаве инсултед ме ин еверы поссибле метход. и муст
      бег то ретурн то тхе хоусе.”

      анд схе росе ас схе споке. лады цатхерине росе алсо, анд тхеы
      турнед бацк. хер ладысхип уас хигхлы инценсед.

      “ыоу хаве но регард, тхен, фор тхе хоноур анд цредит оф мы
      непхеу! унфеелинг, селфисх гирл! до ыоу нот цонсидер тхат а
      цоннецтион уитх ыоу муст дисграце хим ин тхе еыес оф еверыбоды?”

      “лады цатхерине, и хаве нотхинг фуртхер то саы. ыоу кноу мы
      сентиментс.”

      “ыоу аре тхен ресолвед то хаве хим?”

      “и хаве саид но суцх тхинг. и ам онлы ресолвед то ацт ин тхат
      маннер, ухицх уилл, ин мы оун опинион, цонституте мы хаппинесс,
      уитхоут референце то _ыоу_, ор то аны персон со ухоллы
      унцоннецтед уитх ме.”

      “ит ис уелл. ыоу рефусе, тхен, то облиге ме. ыоу рефусе то обеы
      тхе цлаимс оф дуты, хоноур, анд гратитуде. ыоу аре детерминед то
      руин хим ин тхе опинион оф алл хис фриендс, анд маке хим тхе
      цонтемпт оф тхе уорлд.”

      “неитхер дуты, нор хоноур, нор гратитуде,” реплиед елизабетх,
      “хаве аны поссибле цлаим он ме, ин тхе пресент инстанце. но
      принципле оф еитхер уоулд бе виолатед бы мы марриаге уитх мр.
      дарцы. анд уитх регард то тхе ресентмент оф хис фамилы, ор тхе
      индигнатион оф тхе уорлд, иф тхе формер _уере_ ексцитед бы хис
      маррыинг ме, ит уоулд нот гиве ме оне момент’с цонцерн—анд тхе
      уорлд ин генерал уоулд хаве тоо муцх сенсе то жоин ин тхе сцорн.”

      “анд тхис ис ыоур реал опинион! тхис ис ыоур финал ресолве! веры
      уелл. и схалл ноу кноу хоу то ацт. до нот имагине, мисс беннет,
      тхат ыоур амбитион уилл евер бе гратифиед. и цаме то тры ыоу. и
      хопед то финд ыоу реасонабле; бут, депенд упон ит, и уилл царры
      мы поинт.”

      ин тхис маннер лады цатхерине талкед он, тилл тхеы уере ат тхе
      доор оф тхе царриаге, ухен, турнинг хастилы роунд, схе аддед, “и
      таке но леаве оф ыоу, мисс беннет. и сенд но цомплиментс то ыоур
      мотхер. ыоу десерве но суцх аттентион. и ам мост сериоуслы
      дисплеасед.”

      елизабетх маде но ансуер; анд уитхоут аттемптинг то персуаде хер
      ладысхип то ретурн инто тхе хоусе, уалкед кууиетлы инто ит
      херселф. схе хеард тхе царриаге дриве ауаы ас схе процеедед уп
      стаирс. хер мотхер импатиентлы мет хер ат тхе доор оф тхе
      дрессинг-роом, то аск ухы лады цатхерине уоулд нот цоме ин агаин
      анд рест херселф.

      “схе дид нот цхоосе ит,” саид хер даугхтер, “схе уоулд го.”

      “схе ис а веры фине-лоокинг уоман! анд хер цаллинг хере уас
      продигиоуслы цивил! фор схе онлы цаме, и суппосе, то телл ус тхе
      цоллинсес уере уелл. схе ис он хер роад сомеухере, и даре саы,
      анд со, пассинг тхроугх мерытон, тхоугхт схе мигхт ас уелл цалл
      он ыоу. и суппосе схе хад нотхинг партицулар то саы то ыоу,
      лиззы?”

      елизабетх уас форцед то гиве инто а литтле фалсехоод хере; фор то
      ацкноуледге тхе субстанце оф тхеир цонверсатион уас импоссибле.




      цхаптер 57

      тхе дисцомпосуре оф спиритс ухицх тхис екстраординары висит тхреу
      елизабетх инто, цоулд нот бе еасилы оверцоме; нор цоулд схе, фор
      маны хоурс, леарн то тхинк оф ит лесс тхан инцессантлы. лады
      цатхерине, ит аппеаред, хад ацтуаллы такен тхе троубле оф тхис
      жоурнеы фром росингс, фор тхе соле пурпосе оф бреакинг офф хер
      суппосед енгагемент уитх мр. дарцы. ит уас а ратионал сцхеме, то
      бе суре! бут фром ухат тхе репорт оф тхеир енгагемент цоулд
      оригинате, елизабетх уас ат а лосс то имагине; тилл схе
      рецоллецтед тхат _хис_ беинг тхе интимате фриенд оф бинглеы, анд
      _хер_ беинг тхе систер оф жане, уас еноугх, ат а тиме ухен тхе
      експецтатион оф оне уеддинг маде еверыбоды еагер фор анотхер, то
      супплы тхе идеа. схе хад нот херселф форготтен то феел тхат тхе
      марриаге оф хер систер муст бринг тхем море фрекууентлы тогетхер.
      анд хер неигхбоурс ат луцас лодге, тхерефоре (фор тхроугх тхеир
      цоммуницатион уитх тхе цоллинсес, тхе репорт, схе цонцлудед, хад
      реацхед лады цатхерине), хад онлы сет _тхат_ доун ас алмост
      цертаин анд иммедиате, ухицх _схе_ хад лоокед форуард то ас
      поссибле ат соме футуре тиме.

      ин револвинг лады цатхерине’с експрессионс, хоуевер, схе цоулд нот
      хелп феелинг соме унеасинесс ас то тхе поссибле цонсекууенце оф
      хер персистинг ин тхис интерференце. фром ухат схе хад саид оф
      хер ресолутион то превент тхеир марриаге, ит оццурред то
      елизабетх тхат схе муст медитате ан апплицатион то хер непхеу;
      анд хоу хе мигхт таке а симилар репресентатион оф тхе евилс
      аттацхед то а цоннецтион уитх хер, схе даред нот проноунце. схе
      кнеу нот тхе ексацт дегрее оф хис аффецтион фор хис аунт, ор хис
      депенденце он хер жудгмент, бут ит уас натурал то суппосе тхат хе
      тхоугхт муцх хигхер оф хер ладысхип тхан _схе_ цоулд до; анд ит
      уас цертаин тхат, ин енумератинг тхе мисериес оф а марриаге уитх
      _оне_, ухосе иммедиате цоннецтионс уере со унекууал то хис оун,
      хис аунт уоулд аддресс хим он хис уеакест сиде. уитх хис нотионс
      оф дигниты, хе уоулд пробаблы феел тхат тхе аргументс, ухицх то
      елизабетх хад аппеаред уеак анд ридицулоус, цонтаинед муцх гоод
      сенсе анд солид реасонинг.

      иф хе хад беен уаверинг бефоре ас то ухат хе схоулд до, ухицх хад
      офтен сеемед ликелы, тхе адвице анд ентреаты оф со неар а
      релатион мигхт сеттле еверы доубт, анд детермине хим ат онце то
      бе ас хаппы ас дигниты унблемисхед цоулд маке хим. ин тхат цасе
      хе уоулд ретурн но море. лады цатхерине мигхт сее хим ин хер уаы
      тхроугх тоун; анд хис енгагемент то бинглеы оф цоминг агаин то
      нетхерфиелд муст гиве уаы.

      “иф, тхерефоре, ан ексцусе фор нот кеепинг хис промисе схоулд цоме
      то хис фриенд уитхин а феу даыс,” схе аддед, “и схалл кноу хоу то
      ундерстанд ит. и схалл тхен гиве овер еверы експецтатион, еверы
      уисх оф хис цонстанцы. иф хе ис сатисфиед уитх онлы регреттинг
      ме, ухен хе мигхт хаве обтаинед мы аффецтионс анд ханд, и схалл
      соон цеасе то регрет хим ат алл.”

      тхе сурприсе оф тхе рест оф тхе фамилы, он хеаринг ухо тхеир
      виситор хад беен, уас веры греат; бут тхеы облигинглы сатисфиед
      ит, уитх тхе саме кинд оф суппоситион ухицх хад аппеасед мрс.
      беннет’с цуриоситы; анд елизабетх уас спаред фром муцх теасинг он
      тхе субжецт.

      тхе некст морнинг, ас схе уас гоинг доунстаирс, схе уас мет бы хер
      фатхер, ухо цаме оут оф хис либрары уитх а леттер ин хис ханд.

      “лиззы,” саид хе, “и уас гоинг то лоок фор ыоу; цоме инто мы
      роом.”

      схе фоллоуед хим тхитхер; анд хер цуриоситы то кноу ухат хе хад
      то телл хер уас хеигхтенед бы тхе суппоситион оф итс беинг ин
      соме маннер цоннецтед уитх тхе леттер хе хелд. ит судденлы струцк
      хер тхат ит мигхт бе фром лады цатхерине; анд схе антиципатед
      уитх дисмаы алл тхе цонсекууент експланатионс.

      схе фоллоуед хер фатхер то тхе фире плаце, анд тхеы ботх сат
      доун. хе тхен саид,

      “и хаве рецеивед а леттер тхис морнинг тхат хас астонисхед ме
      ексцеединглы. ас ит принципаллы цонцернс ыоурселф, ыоу оугхт то
      кноу итс цонтентс. и дид нот кноу бефоре, тхат и хад _туо_
      даугхтерс он тхе бринк оф матримоны. лет ме цонгратулате ыоу он а
      веры импортант цонкууест.”

      тхе цолоур ноу русхед инто елизабетх’с цхеекс ин тхе
      инстантанеоус цонвицтион оф итс беинг а леттер фром тхе непхеу,
      инстеад оф тхе аунт; анд схе уас ундетерминед ухетхер мост то бе
      плеасед тхат хе експлаинед химселф ат алл, ор оффендед тхат хис
      леттер уас нот ратхер аддрессед то херселф; ухен хер фатхер
      цонтинуед:

      “ыоу лоок цонсциоус. ыоунг ладиес хаве греат пенетратион ин суцх
      маттерс ас тхесе; бут и тхинк и маы дефы евен _ыоур_ сагациты, то
      дисцовер тхе наме оф ыоур адмирер. тхис леттер ис фром мр.
      цоллинс.”

      “фром мр. цоллинс! анд ухат цан _хе_ хаве то саы?”

      “сометхинг веры муцх то тхе пурпосе оф цоурсе. хе бегинс уитх
      цонгратулатионс он тхе аппроацхинг нуптиалс оф мы елдест
      даугхтер, оф ухицх, ит сеемс, хе хас беен толд бы соме оф тхе
      гоод-натуред, госсипинг луцасес. и схалл нот спорт уитх ыоур
      импатиенце, бы реадинг ухат хе саыс он тхат поинт. ухат релатес
      то ыоурселф, ис ас фоллоус: ‘хавинг тхус офферед ыоу тхе синцере
      цонгратулатионс оф мрс. цоллинс анд мыселф он тхис хаппы евент,
      лет ме ноу адд а схорт хинт он тхе субжецт оф анотхер; оф ухицх
      уе хаве беен адвертисед бы тхе саме аутхориты. ыоур даугхтер
      елизабетх, ит ис пресумед, уилл нот лонг беар тхе наме оф беннет,
      афтер хер елдер систер хас ресигнед ит, анд тхе цхосен партнер оф
      хер фате маы бе реасонаблы лоокед уп то ас оне оф тхе мост
      иллустриоус персонагес ин тхис ланд.’

      “цан ыоу поссиблы гуесс, лиззы, ухо ис меант бы тхис? ‘тхис ыоунг
      гентлеман ис блессед, ин а пецулиар уаы, уитх еверы тхинг тхе
      хеарт оф мортал цан мост десире,—сплендид проперты, нобле
      киндред, анд екстенсиве патронаге. ыет ин спите оф алл тхесе
      темптатионс, лет ме уарн мы цоусин елизабетх, анд ыоурселф, оф
      ухат евилс ыоу маы инцур бы а преципитате цлосуре уитх тхис
      гентлеман’с пропосалс, ухицх, оф цоурсе, ыоу уилл бе инцлинед то
      таке иммедиате адвантаге оф.’

      “хаве ыоу аны идеа, лиззы, ухо тхис гентлеман ис? бут ноу ит
      цомес оут:

      “‘мы мотиве фор цаутионинг ыоу ис ас фоллоус. уе хаве реасон то
      имагине тхат хис аунт, лады цатхерине де боургх, доес нот лоок он
      тхе матцх уитх а фриендлы еые.’

      “_мр. дарцы_, ыоу сее, ис тхе ман! ноу, лиззы, и тхинк и _хаве_
      сурприсед ыоу. цоулд хе, ор тхе луцасес, хаве питцхед он аны ман
      уитхин тхе цирцле оф оур ацкууаинтанце, ухосе наме уоулд хаве
      гивен тхе лие море еффецтуаллы то ухат тхеы релатед? мр. дарцы,
      ухо невер лоокс ат аны уоман бут то сее а блемисх, анд ухо
      пробаблы невер лоокед ат _ыоу_ ин хис лифе! ит ис адмирабле!”

      елизабетх триед то жоин ин хер фатхер’с плеасантры, бут цоулд
      онлы форце оне мост релуцтант смиле. невер хад хис уит беен
      дирецтед ин а маннер со литтле агрееабле то хер.

      “аре ыоу нот дивертед?”

      “ох! ыес. праы реад он.”

      “‘афтер ментионинг тхе ликелихоод оф тхис марриаге то хер
      ладысхип ласт нигхт, схе иммедиателы, уитх хер усуал
      цондесценсион, експрессед ухат схе фелт он тхе оццасион; ухен ит
      бецаме аппарент, тхат он тхе сцоре оф соме фамилы обжецтионс он
      тхе парт оф мы цоусин, схе уоулд невер гиве хер цонсент то ухат
      схе термед со дисграцефул а матцх. и тхоугхт ит мы дуты то гиве
      тхе спеедиест интеллигенце оф тхис то мы цоусин, тхат схе анд хер
      нобле адмирер маы бе ауаре оф ухат тхеы аре абоут, анд нот рун
      хастилы инто а марриаге ухицх хас нот беен проперлы санцтионед.’
      мр. цоллинс мореовер аддс, ‘и ам трулы режоицед тхат мы цоусин
      лыдиа’с сад бусинесс хас беен со уелл хусхед уп, анд ам онлы
      цонцернед тхат тхеир ливинг тогетхер бефоре тхе марриаге тоок
      плаце схоулд бе со генераллы кноун. и муст нот, хоуевер, неглецт
      тхе дутиес оф мы статион, ор рефраин фром децларинг мы амаземент
      ат хеаринг тхат ыоу рецеивед тхе ыоунг цоупле инто ыоур хоусе ас
      соон ас тхеы уере марриед. ит уас ан енцоурагемент оф вице; анд
      хад и беен тхе рецтор оф лонгбоурн, и схоулд веры стренуоуслы
      хаве оппосед ит. ыоу оугхт цертаинлы то форгиве тхем, ас а
      цхристиан, бут невер то адмит тхем ин ыоур сигхт, ор аллоу тхеир
      намес то бе ментионед ин ыоур хеаринг.’ _тхат_ ис хис нотион оф
      цхристиан форгивенесс! тхе рест оф хис леттер ис онлы абоут хис
      деар цхарлотте’с ситуатион, анд хис експецтатион оф а ыоунг
      оливе-бранцх. бут, лиззы, ыоу лоок ас иф ыоу дид нот енжоы ит.
      ыоу аре нот гоинг то бе _миссисх_, и хопе, анд претенд то бе
      аффронтед ат ан идле репорт. фор ухат до уе ливе, бут то маке
      спорт фор оур неигхбоурс, анд лаугх ат тхем ин оур турн?”

      “ох!” цриед елизабетх, “и ам ексцессивелы дивертед. бут ит ис со
      странге!”

      “ыес—_тхат_ ис ухат макес ит амусинг. хад тхеы фиксед он аны отхер
      ман ит уоулд хаве беен нотхинг; бут _хис_ перфецт индифференце,
      анд _ыоур_ поинтед дислике, маке ит со делигхтфуллы абсурд! муцх
      ас и абоминате уритинг, и уоулд нот гиве уп мр. цоллинс’с
      цорреспонденце фор аны цонсидератион. наы, ухен и реад а леттер
      оф хис, и цаннот хелп гивинг хим тхе преференце евен овер
      уицкхам, муцх ас и валуе тхе импуденце анд хыпоцрисы оф мы
      сон-ин-лау. анд праы, лиззы, ухат саид лады цатхерине абоут тхис
      репорт? дид схе цалл то рефусе хер цонсент?”

      то тхис кууестион хис даугхтер реплиед онлы уитх а лаугх; анд ас
      ит хад беен аскед уитхоут тхе леаст суспицион, схе уас нот
      дистрессед бы хис репеатинг ит. елизабетх хад невер беен море ат
      а лосс то маке хер феелингс аппеар ухат тхеы уере нот. ит уас
      нецессары то лаугх, ухен схе уоулд ратхер хаве цриед. хер фатхер
      хад мост цруеллы мортифиед хер, бы ухат хе саид оф мр. дарцы’с
      индифференце, анд схе цоулд до нотхинг бут уондер ат суцх а уант
      оф пенетратион, ор феар тхат перхапс, инстеад оф хис сееинг тоо
      _литтле_, схе мигхт хаве фанциед тоо _муцх_.




      цхаптер 58

      инстеад оф рецеивинг аны суцх леттер оф ексцусе фром хис фриенд,
      ас елизабетх халф експецтед мр. бинглеы то до, хе уас абле то
      бринг дарцы уитх хим то лонгбоурн бефоре маны даыс хад пассед
      афтер лады цатхерине’с висит. тхе гентлемен арривед еарлы; анд,
      бефоре мрс. беннет хад тиме то телл хим оф тхеир хавинг сеен хис
      аунт, оф ухицх хер даугхтер сат ин моментары дреад, бинглеы, ухо
      уантед то бе алоне уитх жане, пропосед тхеир алл уалкинг оут. ит
      уас агреед то. мрс. беннет уас нот ин тхе хабит оф уалкинг; мары
      цоулд невер спаре тиме; бут тхе ремаининг фиве сет офф тогетхер.
      бинглеы анд жане, хоуевер, соон аллоуед тхе отхерс то оутстрип
      тхем. тхеы лаггед бехинд, ухиле елизабетх, китты, анд дарцы уере
      то ентертаин еацх отхер. веры литтле уас саид бы еитхер; китты
      уас тоо муцх афраид оф хим то талк; елизабетх уас сецретлы
      форминг а десперате ресолутион; анд перхапс хе мигхт бе доинг тхе
      саме.

      тхеы уалкед тоуардс тхе луцасес, бецаусе китты уисхед то цалл
      упон мариа; анд ас елизабетх сау но оццасион фор макинг ит а
      генерал цонцерн, ухен китты лефт тхем схе уент болдлы он уитх хим
      алоне. ноу уас тхе момент фор хер ресолутион то бе ексецутед, анд,
      ухиле хер цоураге уас хигх, схе иммедиателы саид:

      “мр. дарцы, и ам а веры селфисх цреатуре; анд, фор тхе саке оф
      гивинг релиеф то мы оун феелингс, царе нот хоу муцх и маы бе
      уоундинг ыоурс. и цан но лонгер хелп тханкинг ыоу фор ыоур
      унексамплед кинднесс то мы поор систер. евер синце и хаве кноун
      ит, и хаве беен мост анксиоус то ацкноуледге то ыоу хоу гратефуллы
      и феел ит. уере ит кноун то тхе рест оф мы фамилы, и схоулд нот
      хаве мерелы мы оун гратитуде то експресс.”

      “и ам сорры, ексцеединглы сорры,” реплиед дарцы, ин а тоне оф
      сурприсе анд емотион, “тхат ыоу хаве евер беен информед оф ухат
      маы, ин а мистакен лигхт, хаве гивен ыоу унеасинесс. и дид нот
      тхинк мрс. гардинер уас со литтле то бе трустед.”

      “ыоу муст нот бламе мы аунт. лыдиа’с тхоугхтлесснесс фирст
      бетраыед то ме тхат ыоу хад беен цонцернед ин тхе маттер; анд, оф
      цоурсе, и цоулд нот рест тилл и кнеу тхе партицуларс. лет ме
      тханк ыоу агаин анд агаин, ин тхе наме оф алл мы фамилы, фор тхат
      генероус цомпассион ухицх индуцед ыоу то таке со муцх троубле,
      анд беар со маны мортифицатионс, фор тхе саке оф дисцоверинг
      тхем.”

      “иф ыоу _уилл_ тханк ме,” хе реплиед, “лет ит бе фор ыоурселф
      алоне. тхат тхе уисх оф гивинг хаппинесс то ыоу мигхт адд форце
      то тхе отхер индуцементс ухицх лед ме он, и схалл нот аттемпт то
      дены. бут ыоур _фамилы_ оуе ме нотхинг. муцх ас и респецт тхем, и
      белиеве и тхоугхт онлы оф _ыоу_.”

      елизабетх уас тоо муцх ембаррассед то саы а уорд. афтер а схорт
      паусе, хер цомпанион аддед, “ыоу аре тоо генероус то трифле уитх
      ме. иф ыоур феелингс аре стилл ухат тхеы уере ласт април, телл ме
      со ат онце. _мы_ аффецтионс анд уисхес аре унцхангед, бут оне
      уорд фром ыоу уилл силенце ме он тхис субжецт фор евер.”

      елизабетх, феелинг алл тхе море тхан цоммон аукуарднесс анд
      анксиеты оф хис ситуатион, ноу форцед херселф то спеак; анд
      иммедиателы, тхоугх нот веры флуентлы, гаве хим то ундерстанд
      тхат хер сентиментс хад ундергоне со материал а цханге, синце тхе
      период то ухицх хе аллудед, ас то маке хер рецеиве уитх гратитуде
      анд плеасуре хис пресент ассуранцес. тхе хаппинесс ухицх тхис
      реплы продуцед, уас суцх ас хе хад пробаблы невер фелт бефоре;
      анд хе експрессед химселф он тхе оццасион ас сенсиблы анд ас
      уармлы ас а ман виолентлы ин лове цан бе суппосед то до. хад
      елизабетх беен абле то енцоунтер хис еые, схе мигхт хаве сеен хоу
      уелл тхе експрессион оф хеартфелт делигхт, диффусед овер хис фаце,
      бецаме хим; бут, тхоугх схе цоулд нот лоок, схе цоулд листен, анд
      хе толд хер оф феелингс, ухицх, ин провинг оф ухат импортанце схе
      уас то хим, маде хис аффецтион еверы момент море валуабле.

      тхеы уалкед он, уитхоут кноуинг ин ухат дирецтион. тхере уас тоо
      муцх то бе тхоугхт, анд фелт, анд саид, фор аттентион то аны
      отхер обжецтс. схе соон леарнт тхат тхеы уере индебтед фор тхеир
      пресент гоод ундерстандинг то тхе еффортс оф хис аунт, ухо _дид_
      цалл он хим ин хер ретурн тхроугх лондон, анд тхере релате хер
      жоурнеы то лонгбоурн, итс мотиве, анд тхе субстанце оф хер
      цонверсатион уитх елизабетх; дуеллинг емпхатицаллы он еверы
      експрессион оф тхе латтер ухицх, ин хер ладысхип’с аппрехенсион,
      пецулиарлы денотед хер перверсенесс анд ассуранце; ин тхе белиеф
      тхат суцх а релатион муст ассист хер ендеавоурс то обтаин тхат
      промисе фром хер непхеу ухицх _схе_ хад рефусед то гиве. бут,
      унлуцкилы фор хер ладысхип, итс еффецт хад беен ексацтлы
      цонтрариуисе.

      “ит таугхт ме то хопе,” саид хе, “ас и хад сцарцелы евер аллоуед
      мыселф то хопе бефоре. и кнеу еноугх оф ыоур диспоситион то бе
      цертаин тхат, хад ыоу беен абсолутелы, ирревоцаблы децидед
      агаинст ме, ыоу уоулд хаве ацкноуледгед ит то лады цатхерине,
      франклы анд опенлы.”

      елизабетх цолоуред анд лаугхед ас схе реплиед, “ыес, ыоу кноу
      еноугх оф мы _франкнесс_ то белиеве ме цапабле оф _тхат_. афтер
      абусинг ыоу со абоминаблы то ыоур фаце, и цоулд хаве но сцрупле
      ин абусинг ыоу то алл ыоур релатионс.”

      “ухат дид ыоу саы оф ме, тхат и дид нот десерве? фор, тхоугх ыоур
      аццусатионс уере илл-фоундед, формед он мистакен премисес, мы
      бехавиоур то ыоу ат тхе тиме хад меритед тхе северест репрооф. ит
      уас унпардонабле. и цаннот тхинк оф ит уитхоут абхорренце.”

      “уе уилл нот кууаррел фор тхе греатер схаре оф бламе аннексед то
      тхат евенинг,” саид елизабетх. “тхе цондуцт оф неитхер, иф
      стрицтлы ексаминед, уилл бе иррепроацхабле; бут синце тхен, уе
      хаве ботх, и хопе, импровед ин цивилиты.”

      “и цаннот бе со еасилы рецонцилед то мыселф. тхе рецоллецтион оф
      ухат и тхен саид, оф мы цондуцт, мы маннерс, мы експрессионс
      дуринг тхе ухоле оф ит, ис ноу, анд хас беен маны монтхс,
      инекспрессиблы паинфул то ме. ыоур репрооф, со уелл апплиед, и
      схалл невер форгет: ‘хад ыоу бехавед ин а море гентлеманлике
      маннер.’ тхосе уере ыоур уордс. ыоу кноу нот, ыоу цан сцарцелы
      цонцеиве, хоу тхеы хаве тортуред ме;—тхоугх ит уас соме тиме, и
      цонфесс, бефоре и уас реасонабле еноугх то аллоу тхеир жустице.”

      “и уас цертаинлы веры фар фром експецтинг тхем то маке со стронг
      ан импрессион. и хад нот тхе смаллест идеа оф тхеир беинг евер
      фелт ин суцх а уаы.”

      “и цан еасилы белиеве ит. ыоу тхоугхт ме тхен девоид оф еверы
      пропер феелинг, и ам суре ыоу дид. тхе турн оф ыоур цоунтенанце и
      схалл невер форгет, ас ыоу саид тхат и цоулд нот хаве аддрессед
      ыоу ин аны поссибле уаы тхат уоулд индуце ыоу то аццепт ме.”

      “ох! до нот репеат ухат и тхен саид. тхесе рецоллецтионс уилл нот
      до ат алл. и ассуре ыоу тхат и хаве лонг беен мост хеартилы
      асхамед оф ит.”

      дарцы ментионед хис леттер. “дид ит,” саид хе, “дид ит соон маке
      ыоу тхинк беттер оф ме? дид ыоу, он реадинг ит, гиве аны цредит
      то итс цонтентс?”

      схе експлаинед ухат итс еффецт он хер хад беен, анд хоу градуаллы
      алл хер формер прежудицес хад беен ремовед.

      “и кнеу,” саид хе, “тхат ухат и уроте муст гиве ыоу паин, бут ит
      уас нецессары. и хопе ыоу хаве дестроыед тхе леттер. тхере уас
      оне парт еспециаллы, тхе опенинг оф ит, ухицх и схоулд дреад ыоур
      хавинг тхе поуер оф реадинг агаин. и цан ремембер соме
      експрессионс ухицх мигхт жустлы маке ыоу хате ме.”

      “тхе леттер схалл цертаинлы бе бурнт, иф ыоу белиеве ит ессентиал
      то тхе пресерватион оф мы регард; бут, тхоугх уе хаве ботх реасон
      то тхинк мы опинионс нот ентирелы уналтерабле, тхеы аре нот, и
      хопе, кууите со еасилы цхангед ас тхат имплиес.”

      “ухен и уроте тхат леттер,” реплиед дарцы, “и белиевед мыселф
      перфецтлы цалм анд цоол, бут и ам синце цонвинцед тхат ит уас
      уриттен ин а дреадфул биттернесс оф спирит.”

      “тхе леттер, перхапс, беган ин биттернесс, бут ит дид нот енд со.
      тхе адиеу ис цхариты итселф. бут тхинк но море оф тхе леттер. тхе
      феелингс оф тхе персон ухо уроте, анд тхе персон ухо рецеивед ит,
      аре ноу со уиделы дифферент фром ухат тхеы уере тхен, тхат еверы
      унплеасант цирцумстанце аттендинг ит оугхт то бе форготтен. ыоу
      муст леарн соме оф мы пхилосопхы. тхинк онлы оф тхе паст ас итс
      ремембранце гивес ыоу плеасуре.”

      “и цаннот гиве ыоу цредит фор аны пхилосопхы оф тхе кинд. _ыоур_
      ретроспецтионс муст бе со тоталлы воид оф репроацх, тхат тхе
      цонтентмент арисинг фром тхем ис нот оф пхилосопхы, бут, ухат ис
      муцх беттер, оф инноценце. бут уитх _ме_, ит ис нот со. паинфул
      рецоллецтионс уилл интруде ухицх цаннот, ухицх оугхт нот, то бе
      репеллед. и хаве беен а селфисх беинг алл мы лифе, ин працтице,
      тхоугх нот ин принципле. ас а цхилд и уас таугхт ухат уас
      _ригхт_, бут и уас нот таугхт то цоррецт мы темпер. и уас гивен
      гоод принциплес, бут лефт то фоллоу тхем ин приде анд цонцеит.
      унфортунателы ан онлы сон (фор маны ыеарс ан онлы _цхилд_), и уас
      споилт бы мы парентс, ухо, тхоугх гоод тхемселвес (мы фатхер,
      партицуларлы, алл тхат уас беневолент анд амиабле), аллоуед,
      енцоурагед, алмост таугхт ме то бе селфисх анд овербеаринг; то
      царе фор ноне беыонд мы оун фамилы цирцле; то тхинк меанлы оф алл
      тхе рест оф тхе уорлд; то _уисх_ ат леаст то тхинк меанлы оф
      тхеир сенсе анд уортх цомпаред уитх мы оун. суцх и уас, фром
      еигхт то еигхт анд туенты; анд суцх и мигхт стилл хаве беен бут
      фор ыоу, деарест, ловелиест елизабетх! ухат до и нот оуе ыоу! ыоу
      таугхт ме а лессон, хард индеед ат фирст, бут мост адвантагеоус.
      бы ыоу, и уас проперлы хумблед. и цаме то ыоу уитхоут а доубт оф
      мы рецептион. ыоу схоуед ме хоу инсуффициент уере алл мы
      претенсионс то плеасе а уоман уортхы оф беинг плеасед.”

      “хад ыоу тхен персуадед ыоурселф тхат и схоулд?”

      “индеед и хад. ухат уилл ыоу тхинк оф мы ваниты? и белиевед ыоу
      то бе уисхинг, експецтинг мы аддрессес.”

      “мы маннерс муст хаве беен ин фаулт, бут нот интентионаллы, и
      ассуре ыоу. и невер меант то децеиве ыоу, бут мы спиритс мигхт
      офтен леад ме уронг. хоу ыоу муст хаве хатед ме афтер _тхат_
      евенинг?”

      “хате ыоу! и уас ангры перхапс ат фирст, бут мы ангер соон беган
      то таке а пропер дирецтион.”

      “и ам алмост афраид оф аскинг ухат ыоу тхоугхт оф ме, ухен уе мет
      ат пемберлеы. ыоу бламед ме фор цоминг?”

      “но индеед; и фелт нотхинг бут сурприсе.”

      “ыоур сурприсе цоулд нот бе греатер тхан _мине_ ин беинг нотицед
      бы ыоу. мы цонсциенце толд ме тхат и десервед но екстраординары
      политенесс, анд и цонфесс тхат и дид нот експецт то рецеиве _море_
      тхан мы дуе.”

      “мы обжецт _тхен_,” реплиед дарцы, “уас то схоу ыоу, бы еверы
      цивилиты ин мы поуер, тхат и уас нот со меан ас то ресент тхе
      паст; анд и хопед то обтаин ыоур форгивенесс, то лессен ыоур илл
      опинион, бы леттинг ыоу сее тхат ыоур репроофс хад беен аттендед
      то. хоу соон аны отхер уисхес интродуцед тхемселвес и цан хардлы
      телл, бут и белиеве ин абоут халф ан хоур афтер и хад сеен ыоу.”

      хе тхен толд хер оф георгиана’с делигхт ин хер ацкууаинтанце, анд
      оф хер дисаппоинтмент ат итс судден интерруптион; ухицх натураллы
      леадинг то тхе цаусе оф тхат интерруптион, схе соон леарнт тхат
      хис ресолутион оф фоллоуинг хер фром дербысхире ин кууест оф хер
      систер хад беен формед бефоре хе кууиттед тхе инн, анд тхат хис
      гравиты анд тхоугхтфулнесс тхере хад арисен фром но отхер
      стругглес тхан ухат суцх а пурпосе муст цомпрехенд.

      схе експрессед хер гратитуде агаин, бут ит уас тоо паинфул а
      субжецт то еацх, то бе дуелт он фартхер.

      афтер уалкинг северал милес ин а леисурелы маннер, анд тоо бусы
      то кноу анытхинг абоут ит, тхеы фоунд ат ласт, он ексамининг тхеир
      уатцхес, тхат ит уас тиме то бе ат хоме.

      “ухат цоулд бецоме оф мр. бинглеы анд жане!” уас а уондер ухицх
      интродуцед тхе дисцуссион оф _тхеир_ аффаирс. дарцы уас делигхтед
      уитх тхеир енгагемент; хис фриенд хад гивен хим тхе еарлиест
      информатион оф ит.

      “и муст аск ухетхер ыоу уере сурприсед?” саид елизабетх.

      “нот ат алл. ухен и уент ауаы, и фелт тхат ит уоулд соон хаппен.”

      “тхат ис то саы, ыоу хад гивен ыоур пермиссион. и гуессед ас
      муцх.” анд тхоугх хе ексцлаимед ат тхе терм, схе фоунд тхат ит хад
      беен претты муцх тхе цасе.

      “он тхе евенинг бефоре мы гоинг то лондон,” саид хе, “и маде а
      цонфессион то хим, ухицх и белиеве и оугхт то хаве маде лонг аго.
      и толд хим оф алл тхат хад оццурред то маке мы формер
      интерференце ин хис аффаирс абсурд анд импертинент. хис сурприсе
      уас греат. хе хад невер хад тхе слигхтест суспицион. и толд хим,
      мореовер, тхат и белиевед мыселф мистакен ин суппосинг, ас и хад
      доне, тхат ыоур систер уас индифферент то хим; анд ас и цоулд
      еасилы перцеиве тхат хис аттацхмент то хер уас унабатед, и фелт
      но доубт оф тхеир хаппинесс тогетхер.”

      елизабетх цоулд нот хелп смилинг ат хис еасы маннер оф дирецтинг
      хис фриенд.

      “дид ыоу спеак фром ыоур оун обсерватион,” саид схе, “ухен ыоу
      толд хим тхат мы систер ловед хим, ор мерелы фром мы информатион
      ласт спринг?”

      “фром тхе формер. и хад нарроулы обсервед хер дуринг тхе туо
      виситс ухицх и хад лателы маде хере; анд и уас цонвинцед оф хер
      аффецтион.”

      “анд ыоур ассуранце оф ит, и суппосе, царриед иммедиате
      цонвицтион то хим.”

      “ит дид. бинглеы ис мост унаффецтедлы модест. хис диффиденце хад
      превентед хис депендинг он хис оун жудгмент ин со анксиоус а цасе,
      бут хис релианце он мине маде еверы тхинг еасы. и уас облигед то
      цонфесс оне тхинг, ухицх фор а тиме, анд нот унжустлы, оффендед
      хим. и цоулд нот аллоу мыселф то цонцеал тхат ыоур систер хад
      беен ин тоун тхрее монтхс ласт уинтер, тхат и хад кноун ит, анд
      пурпоселы кепт ит фром хим. хе уас ангры. бут хис ангер, и ам
      персуадед, ластед но лонгер тхан хе ремаинед ин аны доубт оф ыоур
      систер’с сентиментс. хе хас хеартилы форгивен ме ноу.”

      елизабетх лонгед то обсерве тхат мр. бинглеы хад беен а мост
      делигхтфул фриенд; со еасилы гуидед тхат хис уортх уас
      инвалуабле; бут схе цхецкед херселф. схе ремемберед тхат хе хад
      ыет то леарн то бе лаугхед ат, анд ит уас ратхер тоо еарлы то
      бегин. ин антиципатинг тхе хаппинесс оф бинглеы, ухицх оф цоурсе
      уас то бе инфериор онлы то хис оун, хе цонтинуед тхе цонверсатион
      тилл тхеы реацхед тхе хоусе. ин тхе халл тхеы партед.




      цхаптер 59

      “мы деар лиззы, ухере цан ыоу хаве беен уалкинг то?” уас а
      кууестион ухицх елизабетх рецеивед фром жане ас соон ас схе
      ентеред тхеир роом, анд фром алл тхе отхерс ухен тхеы сат доун то
      табле. схе хад онлы то саы ин реплы, тхат тхеы хад уандеред
      абоут, тилл схе уас беыонд хер оун кноуледге. схе цолоуред ас схе
      споке; бут неитхер тхат, нор анытхинг елсе, ауакенед а суспицион
      оф тхе трутх.

      тхе евенинг пассед кууиетлы, унмаркед бы анытхинг екстраординары.
      тхе ацкноуледгед ловерс талкед анд лаугхед, тхе унацкноуледгед
      уере силент. дарцы уас нот оф а диспоситион ин ухицх хаппинесс
      оверфлоус ин миртх; анд елизабетх, агитатед анд цонфусед, ратхер
      _кнеу_ тхат схе уас хаппы тхан _фелт_ херселф то бе со; фор,
      бесидес тхе иммедиате ембаррассмент, тхере уере отхер евилс
      бефоре хер. схе антиципатед ухат уоулд бе фелт ин тхе фамилы ухен
      хер ситуатион бецаме кноун; схе уас ауаре тхат но оне ликед хим
      бут жане; анд евен феаред тхат уитх тхе отхерс ит уас а _дислике_
      ухицх нот алл хис фортуне анд цонсекууенце мигхт до ауаы.

      ат нигхт схе опенед хер хеарт то жане. тхоугх суспицион уас веры
      фар фром мисс беннет’с генерал хабитс, схе уас абсолутелы
      инцредулоус хере.

      “ыоу аре жокинг, лиззы. тхис цаннот бе!—енгагед то мр. дарцы! но,
      но, ыоу схалл нот децеиве ме. и кноу ит то бе импоссибле.”

      “тхис ис а уретцхед бегиннинг индеед! мы соле депенденце уас он
      ыоу; анд и ам суре нободы елсе уилл белиеве ме, иф ыоу до нот.
      ыет, индеед, и ам ин еарнест. и спеак нотхинг бут тхе трутх. хе
      стилл ловес ме, анд уе аре енгагед.”

      жане лоокед ат хер доубтинглы. “ох, лиззы! ит цаннот бе. и кноу
      хоу муцх ыоу дислике хим.”

      “ыоу кноу нотхинг оф тхе маттер. _тхат_ ис алл то бе форгот.
      перхапс и дид нот алуаыс лове хим со уелл ас и до ноу. бут ин
      суцх цасес ас тхесе, а гоод меморы ис унпардонабле. тхис ис тхе
      ласт тиме и схалл евер ремембер ит мыселф.”

      мисс беннет стилл лоокед алл амаземент. елизабетх агаин, анд море
      сериоуслы ассуред хер оф итс трутх.

      “гоод хеавен! цан ит бе реаллы со! ыет ноу и муст белиеве ыоу,”
      цриед жане. “мы деар, деар лиззы, и уоулд—и до цонгратулате
      ыоу—бут аре ыоу цертаин? форгиве тхе кууестион—аре ыоу кууите
      цертаин тхат ыоу цан бе хаппы уитх хим?”

      “тхере цан бе но доубт оф тхат. ит ис сеттлед бетуеен ус алреады,
      тхат уе аре то бе тхе хаппиест цоупле ин тхе уорлд. бут аре ыоу
      плеасед, жане? схалл ыоу лике то хаве суцх а бротхер?”

      “веры, веры муцх. нотхинг цоулд гиве еитхер бинглеы ор мыселф
      море делигхт. бут уе цонсидеред ит, уе талкед оф ит ас
      импоссибле. анд до ыоу реаллы лове хим кууите уелл еноугх? ох,
      лиззы! до анытхинг ратхер тхан марры уитхоут аффецтион. аре ыоу
      кууите суре тхат ыоу феел ухат ыоу оугхт то до?”

      “ох, ыес! ыоу уилл онлы тхинк и феел _море_ тхан и оугхт то до,
      ухен и телл ыоу алл.”

      “ухат до ыоу меан?”

      “ухы, и муст цонфесс тхат и лове хим беттер тхан и до бинглеы. и
      ам афраид ыоу уилл бе ангры.”

      “мы деарест систер, ноу _бе_ сериоус. и уант то талк веры
      сериоуслы. лет ме кноу еверы тхинг тхат и ам то кноу, уитхоут
      делаы. уилл ыоу телл ме хоу лонг ыоу хаве ловед хим?”

      “ит хас беен цоминг он со градуаллы, тхат и хардлы кноу ухен ит
      беган. бут и белиеве и муст дате ит фром мы фирст сееинг хис
      беаутифул гроундс ат пемберлеы.”

      анотхер ентреаты тхат схе уоулд бе сериоус, хоуевер, продуцед тхе
      десиред еффецт; анд схе соон сатисфиед жане бы хер солемн
      ассуранцес оф аттацхмент. ухен цонвинцед он тхат артицле, мисс
      беннет хад нотхинг фуртхер то уисх.

      “ноу и ам кууите хаппы,” саид схе, “фор ыоу уилл бе ас хаппы ас
      мыселф. и алуаыс хад а валуе фор хим. уере ит фор нотхинг бут хис
      лове оф ыоу, и муст алуаыс хаве естеемед хим; бут ноу, ас
      бинглеы’с фриенд анд ыоур хусбанд, тхере цан бе онлы бинглеы анд
      ыоурселф море деар то ме. бут лиззы, ыоу хаве беен веры слы, веры
      ресервед уитх ме. хоу литтле дид ыоу телл ме оф ухат пассед ат
      пемберлеы анд ламбтон! и оуе алл тхат и кноу оф ит то анотхер,
      нот то ыоу.”

      елизабетх толд хер тхе мотивес оф хер сецрецы. схе хад беен
      унуиллинг то ментион бинглеы; анд тхе унсеттлед стате оф хер оун
      феелингс хад маде хер екууаллы авоид тхе наме оф хис фриенд. бут
      ноу схе уоулд но лонгер цонцеал фром хер хис схаре ин лыдиа’с
      марриаге. алл уас ацкноуледгед, анд халф тхе нигхт спент ин
      цонверсатион.

      “гоод грациоус!” цриед мрс. беннет, ас схе стоод ат а уиндоу тхе
      некст морнинг, “иф тхат дисагрееабле мр. дарцы ис нот цоминг хере
      агаин уитх оур деар бинглеы! ухат цан хе меан бы беинг со
      тиресоме ас то бе алуаыс цоминг хере? и хад но нотион бут хе
      уоулд го а-схоотинг, ор сометхинг ор отхер, анд нот дистурб ус
      уитх хис цомпаны. ухат схалл уе до уитх хим? лиззы, ыоу муст уалк
      оут уитх хим агаин, тхат хе маы нот бе ин бинглеы’с уаы.”

      елизабетх цоулд хардлы хелп лаугхинг ат со цонвениент а пропосал;
      ыет уас реаллы вексед тхат хер мотхер схоулд бе алуаыс гивинг хим
      суцх ан епитхет.

      ас соон ас тхеы ентеред, бинглеы лоокед ат хер со експрессивелы,
      анд схоок хандс уитх суцх уармтх, ас лефт но доубт оф хис гоод
      информатион; анд хе соон афтеруардс саид алоуд, “мрс. беннет,
      хаве ыоу но море ланес хереабоутс ин ухицх лиззы маы лосе хер уаы
      агаин то-даы?”

      “и адвисе мр. дарцы, анд лиззы, анд китты,” саид мрс. беннет, “то
      уалк то оакхам моунт тхис морнинг. ит ис а нице лонг уалк, анд
      мр. дарцы хас невер сеен тхе виеу.”

      “ит маы до веры уелл фор тхе отхерс,” реплиед мр. бинглеы; “бут и
      ам суре ит уилл бе тоо муцх фор китты. уон’т ит, китты?” китты
      оунед тхат схе хад ратхер стаы ат хоме. дарцы профессед а греат
      цуриоситы то сее тхе виеу фром тхе моунт, анд елизабетх силентлы
      цонсентед. ас схе уент уп стаирс то гет реады, мрс. беннет
      фоллоуед хер, саыинг:

      “и ам кууите сорры, лиззы, тхат ыоу схоулд бе форцед то хаве тхат
      дисагрееабле ман алл то ыоурселф. бут и хопе ыоу уилл нот минд
      ит: ит ис алл фор жане’с саке, ыоу кноу; анд тхере ис но оццасион
      фор талкинг то хим, ексцепт жуст ноу анд тхен. со, до нот пут
      ыоурселф то инцонвениенце.”

      дуринг тхеир уалк, ит уас ресолвед тхат мр. беннет’с цонсент
      схоулд бе аскед ин тхе цоурсе оф тхе евенинг. елизабетх ресервед
      то херселф тхе апплицатион фор хер мотхер’с. схе цоулд нот
      детермине хоу хер мотхер уоулд таке ит; сометимес доубтинг
      ухетхер алл хис уеалтх анд грандеур уоулд бе еноугх то оверцоме
      хер абхорренце оф тхе ман. бут ухетхер схе уере виолентлы сет
      агаинст тхе матцх, ор виолентлы делигхтед уитх ит, ит уас цертаин
      тхат хер маннер уоулд бе екууаллы илл адаптед то до цредит то хер
      сенсе; анд схе цоулд но море беар тхат мр. дарцы схоулд хеар тхе
      фирст раптурес оф хер жоы, тхан тхе фирст вехеменце оф хер
      дисаппробатион.

      ин тхе евенинг, соон афтер мр. беннет уитхдреу то тхе либрары,
      схе сау мр. дарцы рисе алсо анд фоллоу хим, анд хер агитатион он
      сееинг ит уас екстреме. схе дид нот феар хер фатхер’с оппоситион,
      бут хе уас гоинг то бе маде унхаппы; анд тхат ит схоулд бе
      тхроугх хер меанс—тхат _схе_, хис фавоурите цхилд, схоулд бе
      дистрессинг хим бы хер цхоице, схоулд бе филлинг хим уитх феарс
      анд регретс ин диспосинг оф хер—уас а уретцхед рефлецтион, анд
      схе сат ин мисеры тилл мр. дарцы аппеаред агаин, ухен, лоокинг ат
      хим, схе уас а литтле релиевед бы хис смиле. ин а феу минутес хе
      аппроацхед тхе табле ухере схе уас ситтинг уитх китты; анд, ухиле
      претендинг то адмире хер уорк саид ин а ухиспер, “го то ыоур
      фатхер, хе уантс ыоу ин тхе либрары.” схе уас гоне дирецтлы.

      хер фатхер уас уалкинг абоут тхе роом, лоокинг граве анд анксиоус.
      “лиззы,” саид хе, “ухат аре ыоу доинг? аре ыоу оут оф ыоур
      сенсес, то бе аццептинг тхис ман? хаве нот ыоу алуаыс хатед хим?”

      хоу еарнестлы дид схе тхен уисх тхат хер формер опинионс хад беен
      море реасонабле, хер експрессионс море модерате! ит уоулд хаве
      спаред хер фром експланатионс анд профессионс ухицх ит уас
      ексцеединглы аукуард то гиве; бут тхеы уере ноу нецессары, анд схе
      ассуред хим, уитх соме цонфусион, оф хер аттацхмент то мр. дарцы.

      “ор, ин отхер уордс, ыоу аре детерминед то хаве хим. хе ис рицх,
      то бе суре, анд ыоу маы хаве море фине цлотхес анд фине царриагес
      тхан жане. бут уилл тхеы маке ыоу хаппы?”

      “хаве ыоу аны отхер обжецтион,” саид елизабетх, “тхан ыоур белиеф
      оф мы индифференце?”

      “ноне ат алл. уе алл кноу хим то бе а проуд, унплеасант сорт оф
      ман; бут тхис уоулд бе нотхинг иф ыоу реаллы ликед хим.”

      “и до, и до лике хим,” схе реплиед, уитх теарс ин хер еыес, “и
      лове хим. индеед хе хас но импропер приде. хе ис перфецтлы
      амиабле. ыоу до нот кноу ухат хе реаллы ис; тхен праы до нот паин
      ме бы спеакинг оф хим ин суцх термс.”

      “лиззы,” саид хер фатхер, “и хаве гивен хим мы цонсент. хе ис тхе
      кинд оф ман, индеед, то ухом и схоулд невер даре рефусе анытхинг,
      ухицх хе цондесцендед то аск. и ноу гиве ит то _ыоу_, иф ыоу аре
      ресолвед он хавинг хим. бут лет ме адвисе ыоу то тхинк беттер оф
      ит. и кноу ыоур диспоситион, лиззы. и кноу тхат ыоу цоулд бе
      неитхер хаппы нор респецтабле, унлесс ыоу трулы естеемед ыоур
      хусбанд; унлесс ыоу лоокед уп то хим ас а супериор. ыоур ливелы
      талентс уоулд плаце ыоу ин тхе греатест дангер ин ан унекууал
      марриаге. ыоу цоулд сцарцелы есцапе дисцредит анд мисеры. мы
      цхилд, лет ме нот хаве тхе гриеф оф сееинг _ыоу_ унабле то
      респецт ыоур партнер ин лифе. ыоу кноу нот ухат ыоу аре абоут.”

      елизабетх, стилл море аффецтед, уас еарнест анд солемн ин хер
      реплы; анд ат ленгтх, бы репеатед ассуранцес тхат мр. дарцы уас
      реаллы тхе обжецт оф хер цхоице, бы експлаининг тхе градуал цханге
      ухицх хер естиматион оф хим хад ундергоне, релатинг хер абсолуте
      цертаинты тхат хис аффецтион уас нот тхе уорк оф а даы, бут хад
      стоод тхе тест оф маны монтхс’ суспенсе, анд енумератинг уитх
      енергы алл хис гоод кууалитиес, схе дид цонкууер хер фатхер’с
      инцредулиты, анд рецонциле хим то тхе матцх.

      “уелл, мы деар,” саид хе, ухен схе цеасед спеакинг, “и хаве но
      море то саы. иф тхис бе тхе цасе, хе десервес ыоу. и цоулд нот
      хаве партед уитх ыоу, мы лиззы, то аныоне лесс уортхы.”

      то цомплете тхе фавоурабле импрессион, схе тхен толд хим ухат мр.
      дарцы хад волунтарилы доне фор лыдиа. хе хеард хер уитх
      астонисхмент.

      “тхис ис ан евенинг оф уондерс, индеед! анд со, дарцы дид еверы
      тхинг; маде уп тхе матцх, гаве тхе монеы, паид тхе феллоу’с
      дебтс, анд гот хим хис цоммиссион! со муцх тхе беттер. ит уилл
      саве ме а уорлд оф троубле анд ецономы. хад ит беен ыоур унцле’с
      доинг, и муст анд _уоулд_ хаве паид хим; бут тхесе виолент ыоунг
      ловерс царры еверы тхинг тхеир оун уаы. и схалл оффер то паы хим
      то-морроу; хе уилл рант анд сторм абоут хис лове фор ыоу, анд
      тхере уилл бе ан енд оф тхе маттер.”

      хе тхен рецоллецтед хер ембаррассмент а феу даыс бефоре, он хис
      реадинг мр. цоллинс’с леттер; анд афтер лаугхинг ат хер соме
      тиме, аллоуед хер ат ласт то го—саыинг, ас схе кууиттед тхе роом,
      “иф аны ыоунг мен цоме фор мары ор китты, сенд тхем ин, фор и ам
      кууите ат леисуре.”

      елизабетх’с минд уас ноу релиевед фром а веры хеавы уеигхт; анд,
      афтер халф ан хоур’с кууиет рефлецтион ин хер оун роом, схе уас
      абле то жоин тхе отхерс уитх толерабле цомпосуре. еверы тхинг уас
      тоо рецент фор гаиеты, бут тхе евенинг пассед транкууиллы ауаы;
      тхере уас но лонгер анытхинг материал то бе дреадед, анд тхе
      цомфорт оф еасе анд фамилиариты уоулд цоме ин тиме.

      ухен хер мотхер уент уп то хер дрессинг-роом ат нигхт, схе
      фоллоуед хер, анд маде тхе импортант цоммуницатион. итс еффецт
      уас мост екстраординары; фор он фирст хеаринг ит, мрс. беннет сат
      кууите стилл, анд унабле то уттер а сыллабле. нор уас ит ундер
      маны, маны минутес тхат схе цоулд цомпрехенд ухат схе хеард;
      тхоугх нот ин генерал бацкуард то цредит ухат уас фор тхе
      адвантаге оф хер фамилы, ор тхат цаме ин тхе схапе оф а ловер то
      аны оф тхем. схе беган ат ленгтх то рецовер, то фидгет абоут ин
      хер цхаир, гет уп, сит доун агаин, уондер, анд блесс херселф.

      “гоод грациоус! лорд блесс ме! онлы тхинк! деар ме! мр. дарцы!
      ухо уоулд хаве тхоугхт ит! анд ис ит реаллы труе? ох! мы суеетест
      лиззы! хоу рицх анд хоу греат ыоу уилл бе! ухат пин-монеы, ухат
      жеуелс, ухат царриагес ыоу уилл хаве! жане’с ис нотхинг то
      ит—нотхинг ат алл. и ам со плеасед—со хаппы. суцх а цхарминг
      ман!—со хандсоме! со талл!—ох, мы деар лиззы! праы апологисе фор
      мы хавинг дисликед хим со муцх бефоре. и хопе хе уилл оверлоок
      ит. деар, деар лиззы. а хоусе ин тоун! еверы тхинг тхат ис
      цхарминг! тхрее даугхтерс марриед! тен тхоусанд а ыеар! ох, лорд!
      ухат уилл бецоме оф ме. и схалл го дистрацтед.”

      тхис уас еноугх то прове тхат хер аппробатион неед нот бе
      доубтед: анд елизабетх, режоицинг тхат суцх ан еффусион уас хеард
      онлы бы херселф, соон уент ауаы. бут бефоре схе хад беен тхрее
      минутес ин хер оун роом, хер мотхер фоллоуед хер.

      “мы деарест цхилд,” схе цриед, “и цан тхинк оф нотхинг елсе! тен
      тхоусанд а ыеар, анд веры ликелы море! ’тис ас гоод ас а лорд!
      анд а специал лиценце. ыоу муст анд схалл бе марриед бы а специал
      лиценце. бут мы деарест лове, телл ме ухат дисх мр. дарцы ис
      партицуларлы фонд оф, тхат и маы хаве ит то-морроу.”

      тхис уас а сад омен оф ухат хер мотхер’с бехавиоур то тхе
      гентлеман химселф мигхт бе; анд елизабетх фоунд тхат, тхоугх ин
      тхе цертаин поссессион оф хис уармест аффецтион, анд сецуре оф
      хер релатионс’ цонсент, тхере уас стилл сометхинг то бе уисхед
      фор. бут тхе морроу пассед офф муцх беттер тхан схе експецтед; фор
      мрс. беннет луцкилы стоод ин суцх ауе оф хер интендед сон-ин-лау
      тхат схе вентуред нот то спеак то хим, унлесс ит уас ин хер поуер
      то оффер хим аны аттентион, ор марк хер деференце фор хис
      опинион.

      елизабетх хад тхе сатисфацтион оф сееинг хер фатхер такинг паинс
      то гет ацкууаинтед уитх хим; анд мр. беннет соон ассуред хер тхат
      хе уас рисинг еверы хоур ин хис естеем.

      “и адмире алл мы тхрее сонс-ин-лау хигхлы,” саид хе. “уицкхам,
      перхапс, ис мы фавоурите; бут и тхинк и схалл лике _ыоур_ хусбанд
      кууите ас уелл ас жане’с.”




      цхаптер 60

      елизабетх’с спиритс соон рисинг то плаыфулнесс агаин, схе уантед
      мр. дарцы то аццоунт фор хис хавинг евер фаллен ин лове уитх хер.
      “хоу цоулд ыоу бегин?” саид схе. “и цан цомпрехенд ыоур гоинг он
      цхарминглы, ухен ыоу хад онце маде а бегиннинг; бут ухат цоулд
      сет ыоу офф ин тхе фирст плаце?”

      “и цаннот фикс он тхе хоур, ор тхе спот, ор тхе лоок, ор тхе
      уордс, ухицх лаид тхе фоундатион. ит ис тоо лонг аго. и уас ин
      тхе миддле бефоре и кнеу тхат и _хад_ бегун.”

      “мы беауты ыоу хад еарлы уитхстоод, анд ас фор мы маннерс—мы
      бехавиоур то _ыоу_ уас ат леаст алуаыс бордеринг он тхе унцивил,
      анд и невер споке то ыоу уитхоут ратхер уисхинг то гиве ыоу паин
      тхан нот. ноу бе синцере; дид ыоу адмире ме фор мы импертиненце?”

      “фор тхе ливелинесс оф ыоур минд, и дид.”

      “ыоу маы ас уелл цалл ит импертиненце ат онце. ит уас веры литтле
      лесс. тхе фацт ис, тхат ыоу уере сицк оф цивилиты, оф деференце,
      оф оффициоус аттентион. ыоу уере дисгустед уитх тхе уомен ухо
      уере алуаыс спеакинг, анд лоокинг, анд тхинкинг фор _ыоур_
      аппробатион алоне. и роусед, анд интерестед ыоу, бецаусе и уас со
      унлике _тхем_. хад ыоу нот беен реаллы амиабле, ыоу уоулд хаве
      хатед ме фор ит; бут ин спите оф тхе паинс ыоу тоок то дисгуисе
      ыоурселф, ыоур феелингс уере алуаыс нобле анд жуст; анд ин ыоур
      хеарт, ыоу тхороугхлы десписед тхе персонс ухо со ассидуоуслы
      цоуртед ыоу. тхере—и хаве савед ыоу тхе троубле оф аццоунтинг фор
      ит; анд реаллы, алл тхингс цонсидеред, и бегин то тхинк ит
      перфецтлы реасонабле. то бе суре, ыоу кнеу но ацтуал гоод оф
      ме—бут нободы тхинкс оф _тхат_ ухен тхеы фалл ин лове.”

      “уас тхере но гоод ин ыоур аффецтионате бехавиоур то жане ухиле
      схе уас илл ат нетхерфиелд?”

      “деарест жане! ухо цоулд хаве доне лесс фор хер? бут маке а
      виртуе оф ит бы алл меанс. мы гоод кууалитиес аре ундер ыоур
      протецтион, анд ыоу аре то ексаггерате тхем ас муцх ас поссибле;
      анд, ин ретурн, ит белонгс то ме то финд оццасионс фор теасинг
      анд кууарреллинг уитх ыоу ас офтен ас маы бе; анд и схалл бегин
      дирецтлы бы аскинг ыоу ухат маде ыоу со унуиллинг то цоме то тхе
      поинт ат ласт. ухат маде ыоу со схы оф ме, ухен ыоу фирст цаллед,
      анд афтеруардс динед хере? ухы, еспециаллы, ухен ыоу цаллед, дид
      ыоу лоок ас иф ыоу дид нот царе абоут ме?”

      “бецаусе ыоу уере граве анд силент, анд гаве ме но
      енцоурагемент.”

      “бут и уас ембаррассед.”

      “анд со уас и.”

      “ыоу мигхт хаве талкед то ме море ухен ыоу цаме то диннер.”

      “а ман ухо хад фелт лесс, мигхт.”

      “хоу унлуцкы тхат ыоу схоулд хаве а реасонабле ансуер то гиве,
      анд тхат и схоулд бе со реасонабле ас то адмит ит! бут и уондер
      хоу лонг ыоу _уоулд_ хаве гоне он, иф ыоу хад беен лефт то
      ыоурселф. и уондер ухен ыоу _уоулд_ хаве спокен, иф и хад нот
      аскед ыоу! мы ресолутион оф тханкинг ыоу фор ыоур кинднесс то
      лыдиа хад цертаинлы греат еффецт. _тоо муцх_, и ам афраид; фор
      ухат бецомес оф тхе морал, иф оур цомфорт спрингс фром а бреацх
      оф промисе? фор и оугхт нот то хаве ментионед тхе субжецт. тхис
      уилл невер до.”

      “ыоу неед нот дистресс ыоурселф. тхе морал уилл бе перфецтлы
      фаир. лады цатхерине’с унжустифиабле ендеавоурс то сепарате ус
      уере тхе меанс оф ремовинг алл мы доубтс. и ам нот индебтед фор
      мы пресент хаппинесс то ыоур еагер десире оф експрессинг ыоур
      гратитуде. и уас нот ин а хумоур то уаит фор аны опенинг оф
      ыоурс. мы аунт’с интеллигенце хад гивен ме хопе, анд и уас
      детерминед ат онце то кноу еверы тхинг.”

      “лады цатхерине хас беен оф инфините усе, ухицх оугхт то маке хер
      хаппы, фор схе ловес то бе оф усе. бут телл ме, ухат дид ыоу цоме
      доун то нетхерфиелд фор? уас ит мерелы то риде то лонгбоурн анд
      бе ембаррассед? ор хад ыоу интендед аны море сериоус
      цонсекууенце?”

      “мы реал пурпосе уас то сее _ыоу_, анд то жудге, иф и цоулд,
      ухетхер и мигхт евер хопе то маке ыоу лове ме. мы авоуед оне, ор
      ухат и авоуед то мыселф, уас то сее ухетхер ыоур систер уере
      стилл партиал то бинглеы, анд иф схе уере, то маке тхе цонфессион
      то хим ухицх и хаве синце маде.”

      “схалл ыоу евер хаве цоураге то анноунце то лады цатхерине ухат
      ис то бефалл хер?”

      “и ам море ликелы то уант море тиме тхан цоураге, елизабетх. бут
      ит оугхт то бе доне, анд иф ыоу уилл гиве ме а схеет оф папер, ит
      схалл бе доне дирецтлы.”

      “анд иф и хад нот а леттер то урите мыселф, и мигхт сит бы ыоу
      анд адмире тхе евеннесс оф ыоур уритинг, ас анотхер ыоунг лады
      онце дид. бут и хаве ан аунт, тоо, ухо муст нот бе лонгер
      неглецтед.”

      фром ан унуиллингнесс то цонфесс хоу муцх хер интимацы уитх мр.
      дарцы хад беен овер-ратед, елизабетх хад невер ыет ансуеред мрс.
      гардинер’с лонг леттер; бут ноу, хавинг _тхат_ то цоммуницате
      ухицх схе кнеу уоулд бе мост уелцоме, схе уас алмост асхамед то
      финд тхат хер унцле анд аунт хад алреады лост тхрее даыс оф
      хаппинесс, анд иммедиателы уроте ас фоллоус:

      “и уоулд хаве тханкед ыоу бефоре, мы деар аунт, ас и оугхт то
      хаве доне, фор ыоур лонг, кинд, сатисфацторы, детаил оф
      партицуларс; бут то саы тхе трутх, и уас тоо цросс то урите. ыоу
      суппосед море тхан реаллы ексистед. бут _ноу_ суппосе ас муцх ас
      ыоу цхоосе; гиве а лоосе реин то ыоур фанцы, индулге ыоур
      имагинатион ин еверы поссибле флигхт ухицх тхе субжецт уилл
      аффорд, анд унлесс ыоу белиеве ме ацтуаллы марриед, ыоу цаннот
      греатлы ерр. ыоу муст урите агаин веры соон, анд праисе хим а
      греат деал море тхан ыоу дид ин ыоур ласт. и тханк ыоу, агаин анд
      агаин, фор нот гоинг то тхе лакес. хоу цоулд и бе со силлы ас то
      уисх ит! ыоур идеа оф тхе пониес ис делигхтфул. уе уилл го роунд
      тхе парк еверы даы. и ам тхе хаппиест цреатуре ин тхе уорлд.
      перхапс отхер пеопле хаве саид со бефоре, бут нот оне уитх суцх
      жустице. и ам хаппиер евен тхан жане; схе онлы смилес, и лаугх.
      мр. дарцы сендс ыоу алл тхе лове ин тхе уорлд тхат хе цан спаре
      фром ме. ыоу аре алл то цоме то пемберлеы ат цхристмас. ыоурс,
      етц.”

      мр. дарцы’с леттер то лады цатхерине уас ин а дифферент стыле;
      анд стилл дифферент фром еитхер уас ухат мр. беннет сент то мр.
      цоллинс, ин реплы то хис ласт.

      “деар сир,
      “и муст троубле ыоу онце море фор цонгратулатионс. елизабетх уилл
      соон бе тхе уифе оф мр. дарцы. цонсоле лады цатхерине ас уелл ас
      ыоу цан. бут, иф и уере ыоу, и уоулд станд бы тхе непхеу. хе хас
      море то гиве.

      “ыоурс синцерелы, етц.”

      мисс бинглеы’с цонгратулатионс то хер бротхер, он хис аппроацхинг
      марриаге, уере алл тхат уас аффецтионате анд инсинцере. схе уроте
      евен то жане он тхе оццасион, то експресс хер делигхт, анд репеат
      алл хер формер профессионс оф регард. жане уас нот децеивед, бут
      схе уас аффецтед; анд тхоугх феелинг но релианце он хер, цоулд
      нот хелп уритинг хер а муцх киндер ансуер тхан схе кнеу уас
      десервед.

      тхе жоы ухицх мисс дарцы експрессед он рецеивинг симилар
      информатион, уас ас синцере ас хер бротхер’с ин сендинг ит. фоур
      сидес оф папер уере инсуффициент то цонтаин алл хер делигхт, анд
      алл хер еарнест десире оф беинг ловед бы хер систер.

      бефоре аны ансуер цоулд арриве фром мр. цоллинс, ор аны
      цонгратулатионс то елизабетх фром хис уифе, тхе лонгбоурн фамилы
      хеард тхат тхе цоллинсес уере цоме тхемселвес то луцас лодге. тхе
      реасон оф тхис судден ремовал уас соон евидент. лады цатхерине
      хад беен рендеред со ексцеединглы ангры бы тхе цонтентс оф хер
      непхеу’с леттер, тхат цхарлотте, реаллы режоицинг ин тхе матцх,
      уас анксиоус то гет ауаы тилл тхе сторм уас блоун овер. ат суцх а
      момент, тхе арривал оф хер фриенд уас а синцере плеасуре то
      елизабетх, тхоугх ин тхе цоурсе оф тхеир меетингс схе муст
      сометимес тхинк тхе плеасуре деарлы боугхт, ухен схе сау мр.
      дарцы експосед то алл тхе парадинг анд обсекууиоус цивилиты оф хер
      хусбанд. хе боре ит, хоуевер, уитх адмирабле цалмнесс. хе цоулд
      евен листен то сир уиллиам луцас, ухен хе цомплиментед хим он
      царрыинг ауаы тхе бригхтест жеуел оф тхе цоунтры, анд експрессед
      хис хопес оф тхеир алл меетинг фрекууентлы ат ст. жамес’с, уитх
      веры децент цомпосуре. иф хе дид схруг хис схоулдерс, ит уас нот
      тилл сир уиллиам уас оут оф сигхт.

      мрс. пхиллипс’с вулгариты уас анотхер, анд перхапс а греатер, такс
      он хис форбеаранце; анд тхоугх мрс. пхиллипс, ас уелл ас хер
      систер, стоод ин тоо муцх ауе оф хим то спеак уитх тхе
      фамилиариты ухицх бинглеы’с гоод хумоур енцоурагед, ыет, ухеневер
      схе _дид_ спеак, схе муст бе вулгар. нор уас хер респецт фор хим,
      тхоугх ит маде хер море кууиет, ат алл ликелы то маке хер море
      елегант. елизабетх дид алл схе цоулд то схиелд хим фром тхе
      фрекууент нотице оф еитхер, анд уас евер анксиоус то кееп хим то
      херселф, анд то тхосе оф хер фамилы уитх ухом хе мигхт цонверсе
      уитхоут мортифицатион; анд тхоугх тхе унцомфортабле феелингс
      арисинг фром алл тхис тоок фром тхе сеасон оф цоуртсхип муцх оф
      итс плеасуре, ит аддед то тхе хопе оф тхе футуре; анд схе лоокед
      форуард уитх делигхт то тхе тиме ухен тхеы схоулд бе ремовед фром
      социеты со литтле плеасинг то еитхер, то алл тхе цомфорт анд
      елеганце оф тхеир фамилы парты ат пемберлеы.




      цхаптер 61

      хаппы фор алл хер матернал феелингс уас тхе даы он ухицх мрс.
      беннет гот рид оф хер туо мост десервинг даугхтерс. уитх ухат
      делигхтед приде схе афтеруардс виситед мрс. бинглеы, анд талкед
      оф мрс. дарцы, маы бе гуессед. и уисх и цоулд саы, фор тхе саке
      оф хер фамилы, тхат тхе аццомплисхмент оф хер еарнест десире ин
      тхе естаблисхмент оф со маны оф хер цхилдрен продуцед со хаппы ан
      еффецт ас то маке хер а сенсибле, амиабле, уелл-информед уоман
      фор тхе рест оф хер лифе; тхоугх перхапс ит уас луцкы фор хер
      хусбанд, ухо мигхт нот хаве релисхед доместиц фелициты ин со
      унусуал а форм, тхат схе стилл уас оццасионаллы нервоус анд
      инвариаблы силлы.

      мр. беннет миссед хис сецонд даугхтер ексцеединглы; хис аффецтион
      фор хер дреу хим офтенер фром хоме тхан анытхинг елсе цоулд до.
      хе делигхтед ин гоинг то пемберлеы, еспециаллы ухен хе уас леаст
      експецтед.

      мр. бинглеы анд жане ремаинед ат нетхерфиелд онлы а туелвемонтх.
      со неар а вициниты то хер мотхер анд мерытон релатионс уас нот
      десирабле евен то _хис_ еасы темпер, ор _хер_ аффецтионате хеарт.
      тхе дарлинг уисх оф хис систерс уас тхен гратифиед; хе боугхт ан
      естате ин а неигхбоуринг цоунты то дербысхире, анд жане анд
      елизабетх, ин аддитион то еверы отхер соурце оф хаппинесс, уере
      уитхин тхирты милес оф еацх отхер.

      китты, то хер веры материал адвантаге, спент тхе цхиеф оф хер
      тиме уитх хер туо елдер систерс. ин социеты со супериор то ухат
      схе хад генераллы кноун, хер импровемент уас греат. схе уас нот
      оф со унговернабле а темпер ас лыдиа; анд, ремовед фром тхе
      инфлуенце оф лыдиа’с ексампле, схе бецаме, бы пропер аттентион анд
      манагемент, лесс ирритабле, лесс игнорант, анд лесс инсипид. фром
      тхе фуртхер дисадвантаге оф лыдиа’с социеты схе уас оф цоурсе
      царефуллы кепт, анд тхоугх мрс. уицкхам фрекууентлы инвитед хер то
      цоме анд стаы уитх хер, уитх тхе промисе оф баллс анд ыоунг мен,
      хер фатхер уоулд невер цонсент то хер гоинг.

      мары уас тхе онлы даугхтер ухо ремаинед ат хоме; анд схе уас
      нецессарилы драун фром тхе пурсуит оф аццомплисхментс бы мрс.
      беннет’с беинг кууите унабле то сит алоне. мары уас облигед то микс
      море уитх тхе уорлд, бут схе цоулд стилл морализе овер еверы
      морнинг висит; анд ас схе уас но лонгер мортифиед бы цомпарисонс
      бетуеен хер систерс’ беауты анд хер оун, ит уас суспецтед бы хер
      фатхер тхат схе субмиттед то тхе цханге уитхоут муцх релуцтанце.

      ас фор уицкхам анд лыдиа, тхеир цхарацтерс суфферед но револутион
      фром тхе марриаге оф хер систерс. хе боре уитх пхилосопхы тхе
      цонвицтион тхат елизабетх муст ноу бецоме ацкууаинтед уитх
      ухатевер оф хис ингратитуде анд фалсехоод хад бефоре беен ункноун
      то хер; анд ин спите оф еверы тхинг, уас нот ухоллы уитхоут хопе
      тхат дарцы мигхт ыет бе преваилед он то маке хис фортуне. тхе
      цонгратулаторы леттер ухицх елизабетх рецеивед фром лыдиа он хер
      марриаге, експлаинед то хер тхат, бы хис уифе ат леаст, иф нот бы
      химселф, суцх а хопе уас цхерисхед. тхе леттер уас то тхис
      еффецт:

      “мы деар лиззы,
      “и уисх ыоу жоы. иф ыоу лове мр. дарцы халф ас уелл ас и до мы
      деар уицкхам, ыоу муст бе веры хаппы. ит ис а греат цомфорт то
      хаве ыоу со рицх, анд ухен ыоу хаве нотхинг елсе то до, и хопе
      ыоу уилл тхинк оф ус. и ам суре уицкхам уоулд лике а плаце ат
      цоурт веры муцх, анд и до нот тхинк уе схалл хаве кууите монеы
      еноугх то ливе упон уитхоут соме хелп. аны плаце уоулд до, оф
      абоут тхрее ор фоур хундред а ыеар; бут хоуевер, до нот спеак то
      мр. дарцы абоут ит, иф ыоу хад ратхер нот.

      “ыоурс, етц.”

      ас ит хаппенед тхат елизабетх хад муцх ратхер нот, схе
      ендеавоуред ин хер ансуер то пут ан енд то еверы ентреаты анд
      експецтатион оф тхе кинд. суцх релиеф, хоуевер, ас ит уас ин хер
      поуер то аффорд, бы тхе працтице оф ухат мигхт бе цаллед ецономы
      ин хер оун привате експенцес, схе фрекууентлы сент тхем. ит хад
      алуаыс беен евидент то хер тхат суцх ан инцоме ас тхеирс, ундер
      тхе дирецтион оф туо персонс со екстравагант ин тхеир уантс, анд
      хеедлесс оф тхе футуре, муст бе веры инсуффициент то тхеир
      суппорт; анд ухеневер тхеы цхангед тхеир кууартерс, еитхер жане ор
      херселф уере суре оф беинг апплиед то фор соме литтле ассистанце
      тоуардс дисцхаргинг тхеир биллс. тхеир маннер оф ливинг, евен
      ухен тхе ресторатион оф пеаце дисмиссед тхем то а хоме, уас
      унсеттлед ин тхе екстреме. тхеы уере алуаыс мовинг фром плаце то
      плаце ин кууест оф а цхеап ситуатион, анд алуаыс спендинг море
      тхан тхеы оугхт. хис аффецтион фор хер соон сунк инто
      индифференце; херс ластед а литтле лонгер; анд ин спите оф хер
      ыоутх анд хер маннерс, схе ретаинед алл тхе цлаимс то репутатион
      ухицх хер марриаге хад гивен хер.

      тхоугх дарцы цоулд невер рецеиве _хим_ ат пемберлеы, ыет, фор
      елизабетх’с саке, хе ассистед хим фуртхер ин хис профессион.
      лыдиа уас оццасионаллы а виситор тхере, ухен хер хусбанд уас гоне
      то енжоы химселф ин лондон ор батх; анд уитх тхе бинглеыс тхеы
      ботх оф тхем фрекууентлы стаид со лонг, тхат евен бинглеы’с гоод
      хумоур уас оверцоме, анд хе процеедед со фар ас то _талк_ оф
      гивинг тхем а хинт то бе гоне.

      мисс бинглеы уас веры дееплы мортифиед бы дарцы’с марриаге; бут
      ас схе тхоугхт ит адвисабле то ретаин тхе ригхт оф виситинг ат
      пемберлеы, схе дропт алл хер ресентмент; уас фондер тхан евер оф
      георгиана, алмост ас аттентиве то дарцы ас херетофоре, анд паид
      офф еверы арреар оф цивилиты то елизабетх.

      пемберлеы уас ноу георгиана’с хоме; анд тхе аттацхмент оф тхе
      систерс уас ексацтлы ухат дарцы хад хопед то сее. тхеы уере абле
      то лове еацх отхер евен ас уелл ас тхеы интендед. георгиана хад
      тхе хигхест опинион ин тхе уорлд оф елизабетх; тхоугх ат фирст
      схе офтен листенед уитх ан астонисхмент бордеринг он аларм ат хер
      ливелы, спортиве, маннер оф талкинг то хер бротхер. хе, ухо хад
      алуаыс инспиред ин херселф а респецт ухицх алмост оверцаме хер
      аффецтион, схе ноу сау тхе обжецт оф опен плеасантры. хер минд
      рецеивед кноуледге ухицх хад невер бефоре фаллен ин хер уаы. бы
      елизабетх’с инструцтионс, схе беган то цомпрехенд тхат а уоман
      маы таке либертиес уитх хер хусбанд ухицх а бротхер уилл нот
      алуаыс аллоу ин а систер море тхан тен ыеарс ыоунгер тхан
      химселф.

      лады цатхерине уас екстремелы индигнант он тхе марриаге оф хер
      непхеу; анд ас схе гаве уаы то алл тхе генуине франкнесс оф хер
      цхарацтер ин хер реплы то тхе леттер ухицх анноунцед итс
      аррангемент, схе сент хим лангуаге со веры абусиве, еспециаллы оф
      елизабетх, тхат фор соме тиме алл интерцоурсе уас ат ан енд. бут
      ат ленгтх, бы елизабетх’с персуасион, хе уас преваилед он то
      оверлоок тхе оффенце, анд сеек а рецонцилиатион; анд, афтер а
      литтле фуртхер ресистанце он тхе парт оф хис аунт, хер ресентмент
      гаве уаы, еитхер то хер аффецтион фор хим, ор хер цуриоситы то
      сее хоу хис уифе цондуцтед херселф; анд схе цондесцендед то уаит
      он тхем ат пемберлеы, ин спите оф тхат поллутион ухицх итс уоодс
      хад рецеивед, нот мерелы фром тхе пресенце оф суцх а мистресс,
      бут тхе виситс оф хер унцле анд аунт фром тхе циты.

      уитх тхе гардинерс, тхеы уере алуаыс он тхе мост интимате термс.
      дарцы, ас уелл ас елизабетх, реаллы ловед тхем; анд тхеы уере
      ботх евер сенсибле оф тхе уармест гратитуде тоуардс тхе персонс
      ухо, бы брингинг хер инто дербысхире, хад беен тхе меанс оф
      унитинг тхем.
    


    
енд оф тхе прожецт гутенберг ебоок оф приде анд прежудице, бы жане аустен

*** енд оф тхис прожецт гутенберг ебоок приде анд прежудице ***

***** тхис филе схоулд бе намед 1342-0.ткст ор 1342-0.зип *****
тхис анд алл ассоциатед филес оф вариоус форматс уилл бе фоунд ин:
        хттп://ууу.гутенберг.орг/1/3/4/1342/

продуцед бы анонымоус волунтеерс, анд давид уидгер

упдатед едитионс уилл реплаце тхе превиоус оне--тхе олд едитионс
уилл бе ренамед.

цреатинг тхе уоркс фром публиц домаин принт едитионс меанс тхат но
оне оунс а унитед статес цопыригхт ин тхесе уоркс, со тхе фоундатион
(анд ыоу!) цан цопы анд дистрибуте ит ин тхе унитед статес уитхоут
пермиссион анд уитхоут паыинг цопыригхт роыалтиес.  специал рулес,
сет фортх ин тхе генерал термс оф усе парт оф тхис лиценсе, апплы то
цопыинг анд дистрибутинг прожецт гутенберг-тм елецтрониц уоркс то
протецт тхе прожецт гутенберг-тм цонцепт анд традемарк.  прожецт
гутенберг ис а регистеред традемарк, анд маы нот бе усед иф ыоу
цхарге фор тхе ебоокс, унлесс ыоу рецеиве специфиц пермиссион.  иф ыоу
до нот цхарге анытхинг фор цопиес оф тхис ебоок, цомплыинг уитх тхе
рулес ис веры еасы.  ыоу маы усе тхис ебоок фор неарлы аны пурпосе
суцх ас цреатион оф деривативе уоркс, репортс, перформанцес анд
ресеарцх.  тхеы маы бе модифиед анд принтед анд гивен ауаы--ыоу маы до
працтицаллы анытхинг уитх публиц домаин ебоокс.  редистрибутион ис
субжецт то тхе традемарк лиценсе, еспециаллы цоммерциал
редистрибутион.



*** старт: фулл лиценсе ***

тхе фулл прожецт гутенберг лиценсе
плеасе реад тхис бефоре ыоу дистрибуте ор усе тхис уорк

то протецт тхе прожецт гутенберг-тм миссион оф промотинг тхе фрее
дистрибутион оф елецтрониц уоркс, бы усинг ор дистрибутинг тхис уорк
(ор аны отхер уорк ассоциатед ин аны уаы уитх тхе пхрасе “прожецт
гутенберг”), ыоу агрее то цомплы уитх алл тхе термс оф тхе фулл прожецт
гутенберг-тм лиценсе (аваилабле уитх тхис филе ор онлине ат
хттп://гутенберг.орг/лиценсе).


сецтион 1.  генерал термс оф усе анд редистрибутинг прожецт гутенберг-тм
елецтрониц уоркс

1.а.  бы реадинг ор усинг аны парт оф тхис прожецт гутенберг-тм
елецтрониц уорк, ыоу индицате тхат ыоу хаве реад, ундерстанд, агрее то
анд аццепт алл тхе термс оф тхис лиценсе анд интеллецтуал проперты
(традемарк/цопыригхт) агреемент.  иф ыоу до нот агрее то абиде бы алл
тхе термс оф тхис агреемент, ыоу муст цеасе усинг анд ретурн ор дестроы
алл цопиес оф прожецт гутенберг-тм елецтрониц уоркс ин ыоур поссессион.
иф ыоу паид а фее фор обтаининг а цопы оф ор аццесс то а прожецт
гутенберг-тм елецтрониц уорк анд ыоу до нот агрее то бе боунд бы тхе
термс оф тхис агреемент, ыоу маы обтаин а рефунд фром тхе персон ор
ентиты то ухом ыоу паид тхе фее ас сет фортх ин параграпх 1.е.8.

1.б.  “прожецт гутенберг” ис а регистеред традемарк.  ит маы онлы бе
усед он ор ассоциатед ин аны уаы уитх ан елецтрониц уорк бы пеопле ухо
агрее то бе боунд бы тхе термс оф тхис агреемент.  тхере аре а феу
тхингс тхат ыоу цан до уитх мост прожецт гутенберг-тм елецтрониц уоркс
евен уитхоут цомплыинг уитх тхе фулл термс оф тхис агреемент.  сее
параграпх 1.ц белоу.  тхере аре а лот оф тхингс ыоу цан до уитх прожецт
гутенберг-тм елецтрониц уоркс иф ыоу фоллоу тхе термс оф тхис агреемент
анд хелп пресерве фрее футуре аццесс то прожецт гутенберг-тм елецтрониц
уоркс.  сее параграпх 1.е белоу.

1.ц.  тхе прожецт гутенберг литерары арцхиве фоундатион (“тхе фоундатион”
 ор пглаф), оунс а цомпилатион цопыригхт ин тхе цоллецтион оф прожецт
гутенберг-тм елецтрониц уоркс.  неарлы алл тхе индивидуал уоркс ин тхе
цоллецтион аре ин тхе публиц домаин ин тхе унитед статес.  иф ан
индивидуал уорк ис ин тхе публиц домаин ин тхе унитед статес анд ыоу аре
лоцатед ин тхе унитед статес, уе до нот цлаим а ригхт то превент ыоу фром
цопыинг, дистрибутинг, перформинг, дисплаыинг ор цреатинг деривативе
уоркс басед он тхе уорк ас лонг ас алл референцес то прожецт гутенберг
аре ремовед.  оф цоурсе, уе хопе тхат ыоу уилл суппорт тхе прожецт
гутенберг-тм миссион оф промотинг фрее аццесс то елецтрониц уоркс бы
фреелы схаринг прожецт гутенберг-тм уоркс ин цомплианце уитх тхе термс оф
тхис агреемент фор кеепинг тхе прожецт гутенберг-тм наме ассоциатед уитх
тхе уорк.  ыоу цан еасилы цомплы уитх тхе термс оф тхис агреемент бы
кеепинг тхис уорк ин тхе саме формат уитх итс аттацхед фулл прожецт
гутенберг-тм лиценсе ухен ыоу схаре ит уитхоут цхарге уитх отхерс.

1.д.  тхе цопыригхт лаус оф тхе плаце ухере ыоу аре лоцатед алсо говерн
ухат ыоу цан до уитх тхис уорк.  цопыригхт лаус ин мост цоунтриес аре ин
а цонстант стате оф цханге.  иф ыоу аре оутсиде тхе унитед статес, цхецк
тхе лаус оф ыоур цоунтры ин аддитион то тхе термс оф тхис агреемент
бефоре доунлоадинг, цопыинг, дисплаыинг, перформинг, дистрибутинг ор
цреатинг деривативе уоркс басед он тхис уорк ор аны отхер прожецт
гутенберг-тм уорк.  тхе фоундатион макес но репресентатионс цонцернинг
тхе цопыригхт статус оф аны уорк ин аны цоунтры оутсиде тхе унитед
статес.

1.е.  унлесс ыоу хаве ремовед алл референцес то прожецт гутенберг:

1.е.1.  тхе фоллоуинг сентенце, уитх ацтиве линкс то, ор отхер иммедиате
аццесс то, тхе фулл прожецт гутенберг-тм лиценсе муст аппеар проминентлы
ухеневер аны цопы оф а прожецт гутенберг-тм уорк (аны уорк он ухицх тхе
пхрасе “прожецт гутенберг” аппеарс, ор уитх ухицх тхе пхрасе “прожецт
гутенберг” ис ассоциатед) ис аццессед, дисплаыед, перформед, виеуед,
цопиед ор дистрибутед:

тхис ебоок ис фор тхе усе оф аныоне аныухере ат но цост анд уитх
алмост но рестрицтионс ухатсоевер.  ыоу маы цопы ит, гиве ит ауаы ор
ре-усе ит ундер тхе термс оф тхе прожецт гутенберг лиценсе инцлудед
уитх тхис ебоок ор онлине ат ууу.гутенберг.орг

1.е.2.  иф ан индивидуал прожецт гутенберг-тм елецтрониц уорк ис деривед
фром тхе публиц домаин (доес нот цонтаин а нотице индицатинг тхат ит ис
постед уитх пермиссион оф тхе цопыригхт холдер), тхе уорк цан бе цопиед
анд дистрибутед то аныоне ин тхе унитед статес уитхоут паыинг аны феес
ор цхаргес.  иф ыоу аре редистрибутинг ор провидинг аццесс то а уорк
уитх тхе пхрасе “прожецт гутенберг” ассоциатед уитх ор аппеаринг он тхе
уорк, ыоу муст цомплы еитхер уитх тхе рекууирементс оф параграпхс 1.е.1
тхроугх 1.е.7 ор обтаин пермиссион фор тхе усе оф тхе уорк анд тхе
прожецт гутенберг-тм традемарк ас сет фортх ин параграпхс 1.е.8 ор
1.е.9.

1.е.3.  иф ан индивидуал прожецт гутенберг-тм елецтрониц уорк ис постед
уитх тхе пермиссион оф тхе цопыригхт холдер, ыоур усе анд дистрибутион
муст цомплы уитх ботх параграпхс 1.е.1 тхроугх 1.е.7 анд аны аддитионал
термс импосед бы тхе цопыригхт холдер.  аддитионал термс уилл бе линкед
то тхе прожецт гутенберг-тм лиценсе фор алл уоркс постед уитх тхе
пермиссион оф тхе цопыригхт холдер фоунд ат тхе бегиннинг оф тхис уорк.

1.е.4.  до нот унлинк ор детацх ор ремове тхе фулл прожецт гутенберг-тм
лиценсе термс фром тхис уорк, ор аны филес цонтаининг а парт оф тхис
уорк ор аны отхер уорк ассоциатед уитх прожецт гутенберг-тм.

1.е.5.  до нот цопы, дисплаы, перформ, дистрибуте ор редистрибуте тхис
елецтрониц уорк, ор аны парт оф тхис елецтрониц уорк, уитхоут
проминентлы дисплаыинг тхе сентенце сет фортх ин параграпх 1.е.1 уитх
ацтиве линкс ор иммедиате аццесс то тхе фулл термс оф тхе прожецт
гутенберг-тм лиценсе.

1.е.6.  ыоу маы цонверт то анд дистрибуте тхис уорк ин аны бинары,
цомпрессед, маркед уп, нонпроприетары ор проприетары форм, инцлудинг аны
уорд процессинг ор хыпертекст форм.  хоуевер, иф ыоу провиде аццесс то ор
дистрибуте цопиес оф а прожецт гутенберг-тм уорк ин а формат отхер тхан
“плаин ванилла асции” ор отхер формат усед ин тхе оффициал версион
постед он тхе оффициал прожецт гутенберг-тм уеб сите (ууу.гутенберг.орг),
ыоу муст, ат но аддитионал цост, фее ор експенсе то тхе усер, провиде а
цопы, а меанс оф експортинг а цопы, ор а меанс оф обтаининг а цопы упон
рекууест, оф тхе уорк ин итс оригинал “плаин ванилла асции” ор отхер
форм.  аны алтернате формат муст инцлуде тхе фулл прожецт гутенберг-тм
лиценсе ас специфиед ин параграпх 1.е.1.

1.е.7.  до нот цхарге а фее фор аццесс то, виеуинг, дисплаыинг,
перформинг, цопыинг ор дистрибутинг аны прожецт гутенберг-тм уоркс
унлесс ыоу цомплы уитх параграпх 1.е.8 ор 1.е.9.

1.е.8.  ыоу маы цхарге а реасонабле фее фор цопиес оф ор провидинг
аццесс то ор дистрибутинг прожецт гутенберг-тм елецтрониц уоркс провидед
тхат

- ыоу паы а роыалты фее оф 20% оф тхе гросс профитс ыоу дериве фром
     тхе усе оф прожецт гутенберг-тм уоркс цалцулатед усинг тхе метход
     ыоу алреады усе то цалцулате ыоур апплицабле таксес.  тхе фее ис
     оуед то тхе оунер оф тхе прожецт гутенберг-тм традемарк, бут хе
     хас агреед то донате роыалтиес ундер тхис параграпх то тхе
     прожецт гутенберг литерары арцхиве фоундатион.  роыалты паыментс
     муст бе паид уитхин 60 даыс фоллоуинг еацх дате он ухицх ыоу
     препаре (ор аре легаллы рекууиред то препаре) ыоур периодиц такс
     ретурнс.  роыалты паыментс схоулд бе цлеарлы маркед ас суцх анд
     сент то тхе прожецт гутенберг литерары арцхиве фоундатион ат тхе
     аддресс специфиед ин сецтион 4, “информатион абоут донатионс то
     тхе прожецт гутенберг литерары арцхиве фоундатион.”

- ыоу провиде а фулл рефунд оф аны монеы паид бы а усер ухо нотифиес
     ыоу ин уритинг (ор бы е-маил) уитхин 30 даыс оф рецеипт тхат с/хе
     доес нот агрее то тхе термс оф тхе фулл прожецт гутенберг-тм
     лиценсе.  ыоу муст рекууире суцх а усер то ретурн ор
     дестроы алл цопиес оф тхе уоркс поссессед ин а пхысицал медиум
     анд дисцонтинуе алл усе оф анд алл аццесс то отхер цопиес оф
     прожецт гутенберг-тм уоркс.

- ыоу провиде, ин аццорданце уитх параграпх 1.ф.3, а фулл рефунд оф аны
     монеы паид фор а уорк ор а реплацемент цопы, иф а дефецт ин тхе
     елецтрониц уорк ис дисцоверед анд репортед то ыоу уитхин 90 даыс
     оф рецеипт оф тхе уорк.

- ыоу цомплы уитх алл отхер термс оф тхис агреемент фор фрее
     дистрибутион оф прожецт гутенберг-тм уоркс.

1.е.9.  иф ыоу уисх то цхарге а фее ор дистрибуте а прожецт гутенберг-тм
елецтрониц уорк ор гроуп оф уоркс он дифферент термс тхан аре сет
фортх ин тхис агреемент, ыоу муст обтаин пермиссион ин уритинг фром
ботх тхе прожецт гутенберг литерары арцхиве фоундатион анд мицхаел
харт, тхе оунер оф тхе прожецт гутенберг-тм традемарк.  цонтацт тхе
фоундатион ас сет фортх ин сецтион 3 белоу.

1.ф.

1.ф.1.  прожецт гутенберг волунтеерс анд емплоыеес експенд цонсидерабле
еффорт то идентифы, до цопыригхт ресеарцх он, трансцрибе анд проофреад
публиц домаин уоркс ин цреатинг тхе прожецт гутенберг-тм
цоллецтион.  деспите тхесе еффортс, прожецт гутенберг-тм елецтрониц
уоркс, анд тхе медиум он ухицх тхеы маы бе сторед, маы цонтаин
“дефецтс,” суцх ас, бут нот лимитед то, инцомплете, инаццурате ор
цоррупт дата, трансцриптион еррорс, а цопыригхт ор отхер интеллецтуал
проперты инфрингемент, а дефецтиве ор дамагед диск ор отхер медиум, а
цомпутер вирус, ор цомпутер цодес тхат дамаге ор цаннот бе реад бы
ыоур екууипмент.

1.ф.2.  лимитед уарранты, дисцлаимер оф дамагес - ексцепт фор тхе “ригхт
оф реплацемент ор рефунд” десцрибед ин параграпх 1.ф.3, тхе прожецт
гутенберг литерары арцхиве фоундатион, тхе оунер оф тхе прожецт
гутенберг-тм традемарк, анд аны отхер парты дистрибутинг а прожецт
гутенберг-тм елецтрониц уорк ундер тхис агреемент, дисцлаим алл
лиабилиты то ыоу фор дамагес, цостс анд експенсес, инцлудинг легал
феес.  ыоу агрее тхат ыоу хаве но ремедиес фор неглигенце, стрицт
лиабилиты, бреацх оф уарранты ор бреацх оф цонтрацт ексцепт тхосе
провидед ин параграпх ф3.  ыоу агрее тхат тхе фоундатион, тхе
традемарк оунер, анд аны дистрибутор ундер тхис агреемент уилл нот бе
лиабле то ыоу фор ацтуал, дирецт, индирецт, цонсекууентиал, пунитиве ор
инцидентал дамагес евен иф ыоу гиве нотице оф тхе поссибилиты оф суцх
дамаге.

1.ф.3.  лимитед ригхт оф реплацемент ор рефунд - иф ыоу дисцовер а
дефецт ин тхис елецтрониц уорк уитхин 90 даыс оф рецеивинг ит, ыоу цан
рецеиве а рефунд оф тхе монеы (иф аны) ыоу паид фор ит бы сендинг а
уриттен експланатион то тхе персон ыоу рецеивед тхе уорк фром.  иф ыоу
рецеивед тхе уорк он а пхысицал медиум, ыоу муст ретурн тхе медиум уитх
ыоур уриттен експланатион.  тхе персон ор ентиты тхат провидед ыоу уитх
тхе дефецтиве уорк маы елецт то провиде а реплацемент цопы ин лиеу оф а
рефунд.  иф ыоу рецеивед тхе уорк елецтроницаллы, тхе персон ор ентиты
провидинг ит то ыоу маы цхоосе то гиве ыоу а сецонд оппортуниты то
рецеиве тхе уорк елецтроницаллы ин лиеу оф а рефунд.  иф тхе сецонд цопы
ис алсо дефецтиве, ыоу маы деманд а рефунд ин уритинг уитхоут фуртхер
оппортунитиес то фикс тхе проблем.

1.ф.4.  ексцепт фор тхе лимитед ригхт оф реплацемент ор рефунд сет фортх
ин параграпх 1.ф.3, тхис уорк ис провидед то ыоу 'ас-ис' уитх но отхер
уаррантиес оф аны кинд, експресс ор имплиед, инцлудинг бут нот лимитед то
уаррантиес оф мерцхантибилиты ор фитнесс фор аны пурпосе.

1.ф.5.  соме статес до нот аллоу дисцлаимерс оф цертаин имплиед
уаррантиес ор тхе ексцлусион ор лимитатион оф цертаин тыпес оф дамагес.
иф аны дисцлаимер ор лимитатион сет фортх ин тхис агреемент виолатес тхе
лау оф тхе стате апплицабле то тхис агреемент, тхе агреемент схалл бе
интерпретед то маке тхе максимум дисцлаимер ор лимитатион пермиттед бы
тхе апплицабле стате лау.  тхе инвалидиты ор уненфорцеабилиты оф аны
провисион оф тхис агреемент схалл нот воид тхе ремаининг провисионс.

1.ф.6.  индемниты - ыоу агрее то индемнифы анд холд тхе фоундатион, тхе
традемарк оунер, аны агент ор емплоыее оф тхе фоундатион, аныоне
провидинг цопиес оф прожецт гутенберг-тм елецтрониц уоркс ин аццорданце
уитх тхис агреемент, анд аны волунтеерс ассоциатед уитх тхе продуцтион,
промотион анд дистрибутион оф прожецт гутенберг-тм елецтрониц уоркс,
хармлесс фром алл лиабилиты, цостс анд експенсес, инцлудинг легал феес,
тхат арисе дирецтлы ор индирецтлы фром аны оф тхе фоллоуинг ухицх ыоу до
ор цаусе то оццур: (а) дистрибутион оф тхис ор аны прожецт гутенберг-тм
уорк, (б) алтератион, модифицатион, ор аддитионс ор делетионс то аны
прожецт гутенберг-тм уорк, анд (ц) аны дефецт ыоу цаусе.


сецтион  2.  информатион абоут тхе миссион оф прожецт гутенберг-тм

прожецт гутенберг-тм ис сынонымоус уитх тхе фрее дистрибутион оф
елецтрониц уоркс ин форматс реадабле бы тхе уидест вариеты оф цомпутерс
инцлудинг обсолете, олд, миддле-агед анд неу цомпутерс.  ит ексистс
бецаусе оф тхе еффортс оф хундредс оф волунтеерс анд донатионс фром
пеопле ин алл уалкс оф лифе.

волунтеерс анд финанциал суппорт то провиде волунтеерс уитх тхе
ассистанце тхеы неед, аре цритицал то реацхинг прожецт гутенберг-тм’с
гоалс анд енсуринг тхат тхе прожецт гутенберг-тм цоллецтион уилл
ремаин фреелы аваилабле фор генератионс то цоме.  ин 2001, тхе прожецт
гутенберг литерары арцхиве фоундатион уас цреатед то провиде а сецуре
анд перманент футуре фор прожецт гутенберг-тм анд футуре генератионс.
то леарн море абоут тхе прожецт гутенберг литерары арцхиве фоундатион
анд хоу ыоур еффортс анд донатионс цан хелп, сее сецтионс 3 анд 4
анд тхе фоундатион уеб паге ат хттп://ууу.пглаф.орг.


сецтион 3.  информатион абоут тхе прожецт гутенберг литерары арцхиве
фоундатион

тхе прожецт гутенберг литерары арцхиве фоундатион ис а нон профит
501(ц)(3) едуцатионал цорпоратион организед ундер тхе лаус оф тхе
стате оф миссиссиппи анд грантед такс ексемпт статус бы тхе интернал
ревенуе сервице.  тхе фоундатион’с еин ор федерал такс идентифицатион
нумбер ис 64-6221541.  итс 501(ц)(3) леттер ис постед ат
хттп://пглаф.орг/фундраисинг.  цонтрибутионс то тхе прожецт гутенберг
литерары арцхиве фоундатион аре такс дедуцтибле то тхе фулл екстент
пермиттед бы у.с. федерал лаус анд ыоур стате’с лаус.

тхе фоундатион’с принципал оффице ис лоцатед ат 4557 мелан др. с.
фаирбанкс, ак, 99712., бут итс волунтеерс анд емплоыеес аре сцаттеред
тхроугхоут нумероус лоцатионс.  итс бусинесс оффице ис лоцатед ат
809 нортх 1500 уест, салт лаке циты, ут 84116, (801) 596-1887, емаил
бусинесс@пглаф.орг.  емаил цонтацт линкс анд уп то дате цонтацт
информатион цан бе фоунд ат тхе фоундатион’с уеб сите анд оффициал
паге ат хттп://пглаф.орг

фор аддитионал цонтацт информатион:
     др. грегоры б. неубы
     цхиеф ексецутиве анд дирецтор
     гбнеубы@пглаф.орг


сецтион 4.  информатион абоут донатионс то тхе прожецт гутенберг
литерары арцхиве фоундатион

прожецт гутенберг-тм депендс упон анд цаннот сурвиве уитхоут уиде
спреад публиц суппорт анд донатионс то царры оут итс миссион оф
инцреасинг тхе нумбер оф публиц домаин анд лиценсед уоркс тхат цан бе
фреелы дистрибутед ин мацхине реадабле форм аццессибле бы тхе уидест
арраы оф екууипмент инцлудинг оутдатед екууипмент.  маны смалл донатионс
($1 то $5,000) аре партицуларлы импортант то маинтаининг такс ексемпт
статус уитх тхе ирс.

тхе фоундатион ис цоммиттед то цомплыинг уитх тхе лаус регулатинг
цхаритиес анд цхаритабле донатионс ин алл 50 статес оф тхе унитед
статес.  цомплианце рекууирементс аре нот униформ анд ит такес а
цонсидерабле еффорт, муцх паперуорк анд маны феес то меет анд кееп уп
уитх тхесе рекууирементс.  уе до нот солицит донатионс ин лоцатионс
ухере уе хаве нот рецеивед уриттен цонфирматион оф цомплианце.  то
сенд донатионс ор детермине тхе статус оф цомплианце фор аны
партицулар стате висит хттп://пглаф.орг

ухиле уе цаннот анд до нот солицит цонтрибутионс фром статес ухере уе
хаве нот мет тхе солицитатион рекууирементс, уе кноу оф но прохибитион
агаинст аццептинг унсолицитед донатионс фром донорс ин суцх статес ухо
аппроацх ус уитх офферс то донате.

интернатионал донатионс аре гратефуллы аццептед, бут уе цаннот маке
аны статементс цонцернинг такс треатмент оф донатионс рецеивед фром
оутсиде тхе унитед статес.  у.с. лаус алоне суамп оур смалл стафф.

плеасе цхецк тхе прожецт гутенберг уеб пагес фор цуррент донатион
метходс анд аддрессес.  донатионс аре аццептед ин а нумбер оф отхер
уаыс инцлудинг цхецкс, онлине паыментс анд цредит цард донатионс.
то донате, плеасе висит: хттп://пглаф.орг/донате


сецтион 5.  генерал информатион абоут прожецт гутенберг-тм елецтрониц
уоркс.

профессор мицхаел с. харт ис тхе оригинатор оф тхе прожецт гутенберг-тм
цонцепт оф а либрары оф елецтрониц уоркс тхат цоулд бе фреелы схаред
уитх аныоне.  фор тхирты ыеарс, хе продуцед анд дистрибутед прожецт
гутенберг-тм ебоокс уитх онлы а лоосе нетуорк оф волунтеер суппорт.


прожецт гутенберг-тм ебоокс аре офтен цреатед фром северал принтед
едитионс, алл оф ухицх аре цонфирмед ас публиц домаин ин тхе у.с.
унлесс а цопыригхт нотице ис инцлудед.  тхус, уе до нот нецессарилы
кееп ебоокс ин цомплианце уитх аны партицулар папер едитион.


мост пеопле старт ат оур уеб сите ухицх хас тхе маин пг сеарцх фацилиты:

     хттп://ууу.гутенберг.орг

тхис уеб сите инцлудес информатион абоут прожецт гутенберг-тм,
инцлудинг хоу то маке донатионс то тхе прожецт гутенберг литерары
арцхиве фоундатион, хоу то хелп продуце оур неу ебоокс, анд хоу то
субсцрибе то оур емаил неуслеттер то хеар абоут неу ебоокс.


